[PAGE 1]
The Optimal BERT Surgeon: Scalable and Accurate Second-Order
Pruning for Large Language Models
Eldar Kurtic∗ 1, Daniel Campos2,3, Tuan Nguyen2, Elias Frantar1, Mark Kurtz2,
Benjamin Fineran2, Michael Goin2, and Dan Alistarh1,2
1Institute of Science and Technology Austria
2Neural Magic Inc.
3Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of
sparsifying BERT models, which are a key
building block for natural language processing, in order to reduce their storage and
computational cost. We introduce the Optimal
BERT Surgeon (oBERT), an efﬁcient and accurate pruning method based on approximate
second-order information, which we show to
yield state-of-the-art results for compression
in both stages of language tasks: pre-training
and ﬁne-tuning. Speciﬁcally, oBERT extends
existing work on second-order pruning by
allowing for pruning blocks of weights, and
is the ﬁrst such method that is applicable at
BERT scale. Second, we investigate compounding compression approaches to obtain
highly compressed but accurate models for
deployment on edge devices. These models
signiﬁcantly push boundaries of the current
state-of-the-art sparse BERT models with
respect to all metrics: model size, inference
speed and task accuracy. For example, relative to the dense BERT BASE , we obtain 10x
model size compression with < 1% accuracy
drop, 10x CPU-inference speedup with
< 2% accuracy drop, and 29x CPU-inference
speedup with < 7.5% accuracy drop. Our
code, fully integrated with Transformers and
SparseML, is available at https://github.
com/neuralmagic/sparseml/tree/main/
research/optimal_BERT_surgeon_oBERT.
1 Introduction
Pre-trained Transformer models (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Devlin et al., 2019) provide robust language
representations which can be specialized on various tasks. Given their massive growth (Radford
et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2022), techniques for
reducing their computational overheads have become popular. One classic technique is Knowledge
∗ Corresponding author: eldar.kurtic@ist.ac.at.
60 70 80 90 97
Sparsity (%)
70.0
72.5
75.0
77.5
80.0
82.5
85.0
87.5
90.0F1 score
BERTBASE
Lottery Ticket
Sparse BERT
Movement Pruning
oBERT (ours)
Figure 1: Performance overview relative to stateof-the-art unstructured downstream pruning methods
Chen et al. (2020), Xu et al. (2021), Sanh et al.
(2020), in this order, of the BERT BASE model on the
SQuADv1.1 task.
Distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015), which transfers knowledge from a larger teacher to a smaller
student model. Other work has leveraged lowerprecision representations to produce quantized
models. An orthogonal approach, which is our
primary focus, has been to apply unstructured and
block pruning, i.e. removing individual weights, to
produce compressed but accurate language models. Figure 1 provides a comparative overview of
state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.
In this paper, we introduce a method for improved unstructured and semi-structured (block)
pruning, by leveraging the second-order approach
pioneered by the Optimal Brain Surgeon framework (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi and Stork, 1992),
which we scale for the ﬁrst time to LLMs. Further,
we put our results in the context of a compound
compression approach, which combines several
compression techniques to obtain sparse models
which we execute on a sparsity-aware CPU-based
runtime (NeuralMagic, 2021), showing order-ofmagnitude speedups at low accuracy loss.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We perform a thorough exploration of
arXiv:2203.07259v3 [cs.CL] 17 Oct 2022

[PAGE 2]
weight pruning approaches applied to LLMs,
including lottery-ticket, movement pruning,
magnitude and second-order pruning.
• We introduce a general second-order pruning method called Optimal BERT Surgeon
(oBERT), which supports unstructured and
block pruning, and is the ﬁrst second-order
method to be both highly-accurate and scalable to the dimensionality of BERT models.
• We illustrate the beneﬁts of oBERT by
signiﬁcantly improving upon existing stateof-the-art pruning methods, in both stages
of language tasks: pre-training and ﬁnetuning. For illustration, when pruning
BERTBASE , oBERT outperforms Movement
Pruning (MvP), the most accurate prior approach, by more than 2% absolute F1 score at
the same sparsity, and can match the accuracy
of MvP models with 3x fewer parameters.
• We investigate the applicability of this pruning method in a framework which compounds
popular compression approaches for LLMs,
i.e. applying pruning in combination with
layer dropping and/or quantization. In this
context, we show that our resulting sparse
models provide order-of-magnitude improvements compared to other compound compressed models, and that they can be easily
deployed for CPU inference.
2 Background and Related Work
Transformer LLMs are usually built using multiple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani
et al., 2017). Each transformer has a variation of
two sub-components: multi head attention (MHA)
and fully connected feed forward network (FFN).
Given the massive size of well-performing models,
there has been growing interest in LLM compression. They have been shown to be fragile as minor
perturbations can lead to model collapse (Kovaleva
et al., 2021). Pruning schemes are motivated by
weight saliency metrics which represent the loss
in accuracy due to pruning. It is common to prune
in iterative steps, each of which removes weights
until a desired sparsity level is reached. Now, we
brieﬂy overview existing approaches.
Structured pruning for LLMs focuses on reducing the number of layers and/or attention heads,
and requires structural understanding of the model.
Michel et al. (2019) and V oita et al. (2019) demonstrated that for some tasks nearly 40% of attention
heads can be removed without major impact on
accuracy. Other work has focused on removing
layers (Sridhar and Sarah, 2020), and on the order
in which they are removed (Sajjad et al., 2020). In
some of our experiments, we apply standard “direct” layer dropping in conjunction with pruning.
Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate approach, by which smaller groups, e.g. rectangular
sets of weights (Lagunas et al., 2021), are set to
zero. This approach has recently gained in popularity thanks to efﬁcient computational support.
We extend the second-order pruning formulation
to such groupings, and show results for a speciﬁc
grouping supported by a CPU-inference engine.
Unstructured pruning removes individual
weights by setting them to zero. Gradual Magnitude Pruning (GMP) is a classic approach, which
makes use of weight magnitudes as a saliency metric for pruning (Han et al., 2015; Gale et al., 2019).
First-order pruning methods use a gradient
based formulation of the saliency metric. A popular method is Movement Pruning (MvP) (Sanh
et al., 2020), speciﬁcally designed for pruning
in the ﬁne-tuning stage. Intuitively, it removes
weights that are moving towards zero. The
resulting models were the ﬁrst to achieve high
sparsity with tolerable accuracy loss. Methods
such as PLATON (Zhang et al., 2022) attempt
to capture the uncertainty of weights importance
scores by upper conﬁdence bound estimation.
Prior to our work, MvP and PLATON approaches
set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.
Second-order pruning methods (LeCun et al.,
1989; Hassibi and Stork, 1992; Singh and Alistarh, 2020; Frantar et al., 2021) were developed
in the context of image classiﬁcation, and leverage complex approximations of the loss curvature.
However, second-order pruning methods require
an approximation of the inverse Hessian, which
is expensive to store and compute with for LLM
parameter counts. The approach we propose is similar to WoodFisher/M-FAC methods (Singh and
Alistarh, 2020; Frantar et al., 2021), but is the
ﬁrst to work accurately at LLM scale. Speciﬁcally, the WoodFisher approach is infeasible at
BERT scale, as it requires storing gradients for
inverse Fisher calculation in memory at the point
of pruning. The M-FAC approach scales, but we
show that its parametrization yields worse prun2

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.
Row 1: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: et al., 2017). Each transformer has a variation of | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: Second-order pruning methods (LeCun et al.,
Row 2: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: two sub-components: multi head attention (MHA) | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: 1989; Hassibi and Stork, 1992; Singh and AlisRow 3: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: and fully connected feed forward network (FFN). | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: tarh, 2020; Frantar et al., 2021) were developed
Row 4: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: Given the massive size of well-performing models, | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: in the context of image classification, and leverRow 5: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: there has been growing interest in LLM compres- | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: age complex approximations of the loss curvature.
Row 6: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: sion. They have been shown to be fragile as minor | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: However, second-order pruning methods require
Row 7: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: perturbations can lead to model collapse (Kovaleva | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: an approximation of the inverse Hessian, which
Row 8: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: et al., 2021). Pruning schemes are motivated by | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: is expensive to store and compute with for LLM
Row 9: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: weight saliency metrics which represent the loss | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: parameter counts. The approach we propose is simRow 10: ple transformer layers with self-attention (Vaswani: in accuracy due to pruning. It is common to prune | set state-of-the-art results for unstructured pruning.: ilar to WoodFisher/M-FAC methods (Singh and
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=2 index=2]
Columns: method to be both highly-accurate and scal- | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate apRow 1: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: able to the dimensionality of BERT models. | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: proach, by which smaller groups, e.g. rectangular
Row 2: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: • We illustrate the benefits of oBERT by | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: sets of weights (Lagunas et al., 2021), are set to
Row 3: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: significantly improving upon existing state- | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: zero. This approach has recently gained in popRow 4: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: of-the-art pruning methods, in both stages | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: ularity thanks to efficient computational support.
Row 5: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: of language tasks: pre-training and fine- | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: We extend the second-order pruning formulation
Row 6: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: tuning. For illustration, when pruning | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: to such groupings, and show results for a specific
Row 7: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: BERTBASE , oBERT outperforms Movement | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: grouping supported by a CPU-inference engine.
Row 8: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: Pruning (MvP), the most accurate prior ap- | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: Unstructured pruning removes individual
Row 9: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: proach, by more than 2% absolute F1 score at | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: weights by setting them to zero. Gradual MagniRow 10: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: the same sparsity, and can match the accuracy | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: tude Pruning (GMP) is a classic approach, which
Row 11: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: of MvP models with 3x fewer parameters. | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: makes use of weight magnitudes as a saliency metRow 12: method to be both highly-accurate and scal-: • We investigate the applicability of this prun- | Semi-structured pruning is an intermediate ap-: ric for pruning (Han et al., 2015; Gale et al., 2019).
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=2 index=3]
Columns: weight pruning approaches applied to LLMs, | strated that for some tasks nearly 40% of attention
Row 1: weight pruning approaches applied to LLMs,: including lottery-ticket, movement pruning, | strated that for some tasks nearly 40% of attention: heads can be removed without major impact on
Row 2: weight pruning approaches applied to LLMs,: magnitude and second-order pruning. | strated that for some tasks nearly 40% of attention: accuracy. Other work has focused on removing
Row 3: weight pruning approaches applied to LLMs,: • We introduce a general second-order prun- | strated that for some tasks nearly 40% of attention: layers (Sridhar and Sarah, 2020), and on the order
Row 4: weight pruning approaches applied to LLMs,: ing method called Optimal BERT Surgeon | strated that for some tasks nearly 40% of attention: in which they are removed (Sajjad et al., 2020). In
Row 5: weight pruning approaches applied to LLMs,: (oBERT), which supports unstructured and | strated that for some tasks nearly 40% of attention: some of our experiments, we apply standard “diRow 6: weight pruning approaches applied to LLMs,: block pruning, and is the first second-order | strated that for some tasks nearly 40% of attention: rect” layer dropping in conjunction with pruning.
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=2 index=4]
Columns: until a desired sparsity level is reached. Now, we | first to work | accurately at | LLM | Unnamed: 0 | scale. Specifi- | Unnamed: 1
Row 1: until a desired sparsity level is reached. Now, we: briefly overview existing approaches. | first to work: cally, the | accurately at: WoodFisher approach | LLM: | Unnamed: 0: | scale. Specifi-: is infeasible | Unnamed: 1: at
Row 2: until a desired sparsity level is reached. Now, we: Structured pruning for LLMs focuses on reduc- | first to work: BERT scale, | accurately at: as it requires storing gradients | LLM: | Unnamed: 0: | scale. Specifi-: | Unnamed: 1: for
Row 3: until a desired sparsity level is reached. Now, we: ing the number of layers and/or attention heads, | first to work: inverse Fisher calculation in memory at the point | accurately at: | LLM: | Unnamed: 0: | scale. Specifi-: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 4: until a desired sparsity level is reached. Now, we: and requires structural understanding of the model. | first to work: of pruning. The M-FAC approach scales, but we | accurately at: | LLM: | Unnamed: 0: | scale. Specifi-: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 5: until a desired sparsity level is reached. Now, we: Michel et al. (2019) and Voita et al. (2019) demon- | first to work: show that its parametrization yields worse prun- | accurately at: | LLM: | Unnamed: 0: | scale. Specifi-: | Unnamed: 1:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
ing results (Appendix Figure 3). This is because
M-FAC performs full-matrix (non-blocked) inversion by default, which is inherently noisy. In addition, we extend the theoretical OBS approach
to semi-structured (block) compression. We also
show that our method can be applied during LLM
pre-training and ﬁne-tuning, yielding state-of-theart results in both regimes.
Knowledge Distillation (Hinton et al., 2015)
trains a smaller student model against outputs of a
larger teacher model by adding a loss component
which minimizes the KL-divergence between the
two output distributions, which is the approach we
adopt in our setup too. A hardness parameter is
used to control the mixture of regular and distillation loss, and a temperature parameter to control softness of the distribution. Contrary to this,
approaches like DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019),
TinyBERT (Jiao et al., 2020), MobileBERT (Sun
et al., 2020a), and MiniLM (Wang et al., 2020) utilize more complex distillation schemes, based on
transferring knowledge from intermediate model’s
representations. Our sparse models provide orderof-magnitude improvements upon some of these
methods.
Quantization represents weights and activations
in lower precision (Courbariaux et al., 2016), and
was used to obtain models such as Q8BERT (Zafrir
et al., 2019) and TernaryBERT (Zhang et al., 2020).
Shen et al. (2020) uses information about
the Hessian spectrum to choose quantization bitwidths, whereas Yu et al. (2022) uses an approximation of the Hessian trace for structured pruning.
These Hessian-based approaches are different from
the one we propose, as we use completely different
inverse-Hessian approximations to guide pruning
decisions. The focus of our work is onweight pruning, and on computational speedups achievable on
commodity CPUs. As such, the methods we investigate are orthogonal to quantization. Moreover, it
is impossible to directly compare to low-bitwidth
quantized models as most inference frameworks
do not support such custom formats. Therefore, we
will only make use of the standard QuantizationAware Training (QAT) to 8-bit weights, which is
well-supported on Intel CPUs, and showcase the
resulting speedups in conjunction with layer dropping and weight pruning.
Downstream compression methods attempt to
compress directly while ﬁne-tuning on a speciﬁc
task. MvP method is specially designed for this
setup. Upstream compression methods compress
during the pre-training phase, reducing the need
for task-speciﬁc pruning. Chen et al. (2020)
examined the “Lottery Ticket” strategies (Frankle
and Carbin, 2018) which, as we illustrate later,
incur huge accuracy loss even at moderate
sparsities. Recent work “Prune Once for All”
(Prune OFA) by Zafrir et al. (2021) showed that
well-tuned magnitude pruning can be competitive
with downstream methods like MvP.
We ﬁrst examine the performance of prior pruning methods, notably MvP, Prune OFA, and Lottery
Tickets, relative to the new second-order oBERT
method. The approach we propose consistently
improves upon all these prior methods, both in
pre-training (upstream) and ﬁne-tuning (downstream) stages, and can be compounded with other
compression techniques to obtain models that are
smaller, faster and more accurate than models like
DistilBERT, TinyBERT, and block MvP.
Additional approaches for efﬁcient inference of
LLMs exist, like token-pruning and early-exiting.
These approaches are orthogonal to ours; therefore
we discuss them in Appendix A.2.
3 The Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT)
3.1 Generalized Second-Order Block
Pruning
The pruning problem starts from a well-optimized
dense model w∗∈ Rd, and aims to ﬁnd a sparse
version of w∗, where many of the weights are set
to zero, and the remaining weights may be updated accordingly in order to preserve the loss. It
is common for this process to occur gradually, i.e.
by progressively removing the weights. A classic
approach (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi and Stork,
1992) for “optimal” pruning of weights from w∗
at a step is to expand the loss function L locally
around w∗ with respect to a sparse 0/1 weight mask
M. If we denote by wM = (M⊙ w∗), the model
resulting from the Hadamard (element-wise) product between M∈{ 0, 1}d and w∗, we can use the
Taylor expansion at wM to obtain:
L(wM)≃L (w∗) + (wM− w∗)⊤∇L(w∗)
+1
2(wM− w∗)⊤HL(w∗)(wM− w∗).
Given that w∗ is well-optimized, it is reasonable
in practice to assume that ∇L(w∗)≈ 0. Then,

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: used to control the mixture of regular and distil- | method. The approach we propose consistently
Row 1: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: lation loss, and a temperature parameter to con- | method. The approach we propose consistently: improves upon all these prior methods, both in
Row 2: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: trol softness of the distribution. Contrary to this, | method. The approach we propose consistently: pre-training (upstream) and fine-tuning (downRow 3: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: approaches like DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019), | method. The approach we propose consistently: stream) stages, and can be compounded with other
Row 4: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: TinyBERT (Jiao et al., 2020), MobileBERT (Sun | method. The approach we propose consistently: compression techniques to obtain models that are
Row 5: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: et al., 2020a), and MiniLM (Wang et al., 2020) uti- | method. The approach we propose consistently: smaller, faster and more accurate than models like
Row 6: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: lize more complex distillation schemes, based on | method. The approach we propose consistently: DistilBERT, TinyBERT, and block MvP.
Row 7: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: transferring knowledge from intermediate model’s | method. The approach we propose consistently: Additional approaches for efficient inference of
Row 8: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: representations. Our sparse models provide order- | method. The approach we propose consistently: LLMs exist, like token-pruning and early-exiting.
Row 9: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: of-magnitude improvements upon some of these | method. The approach we propose consistently: These approaches are orthogonal to ours; therefore
Row 10: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: methods. | method. The approach we propose consistently: we discuss them in Appendix A.2.
Row 11: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: Quantization represents weights and activations | method. The approach we propose consistently:
Row 12: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: | method. The approach we propose consistently: 3 The Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT)
Row 13: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: in lower precision (Courbariaux et al., 2016), and | method. The approach we propose consistently:
Row 14: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: was used to obtain models such as Q8BERT (Zafrir | method. The approach we propose consistently: 3.1 Generalized Second-Order Block
Row 15: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: et al., 2019) and TernaryBERT (Zhang et al., 2020). | method. The approach we propose consistently: Pruning
Row 16: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: Shen et al. (2020) uses information about | method. The approach we propose consistently: The pruning problem starts from a well-optimized
Row 17: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: the Hessian spectrum to choose quantization bit- | method. The approach we propose consistently: dense model w∗ ∈ Rd, and aims to find a sparse
Row 18: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: widths, whereas Yu et al. (2022) uses an approxi- | method. The approach we propose consistently: version of w∗, where many of the weights are set
Row 19: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: mation of the Hessian trace for structured pruning. | method. The approach we propose consistently: to zero, and the remaining weights may be upRow 20: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: These Hessian-based approaches are different from | method. The approach we propose consistently: dated accordingly in order to preserve the loss. It
Row 21: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: the one we propose, as we use completely different | method. The approach we propose consistently: is common for this process to occur gradually, i.e.
Row 22: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: inverse-Hessian approximations to guide pruning | method. The approach we propose consistently: by progressively removing the weights. A classic
Row 23: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: decisions. The focus of our work is on weight prun- | method. The approach we propose consistently: approach (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi and Stork,
Row 24: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: ing, and on computational speedups achievable on | method. The approach we propose consistently: 1992) for “optimal” pruning of weights from w∗
Row 25: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: commodity CPUs. As such, the methods we inves- | method. The approach we propose consistently: at a step is to expand the loss function L locally
Row 26: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: tigate are orthogonal to quantization. Moreover, it | method. The approach we propose consistently: around w∗ with respect to a sparse 0/1 weight mask
Row 27: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: is impossible to directly compare to low-bitwidth | method. The approach we propose consistently: M. If we denote by w w∗M = (M ), the model
Row 28: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: quantized models as most inference frameworks | method. The approach we propose consistently: resulting from the Hadamard (element-wise) prodRow 29: used to control the mixture of regular and distil-: do not support such custom formats. Therefore, we | method. The approach we propose consistently: uct between M ∈ {0, 1}d and w∗, we can use the
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
the change in loss incurred by pruning a subset of
weights can be expressed as
δL(δw)≃ 1
2δw⊤HL(w∗)δw (1)
whereδL(δw) :=L(wM)−L (w∗) andδw :=
wM− w∗. A popular way of approximating the
Hessian at w∗ is via a dampened empirical Fisher
information matrix (Hassibi and Stork, 1992):
HL(w)≃ˆF(w)=λId+ 1
m
m∑
i=1
∇Li(w)∇L⊤
i (w),
(2)
where λ ≥ 0 is a small dampening constant,
Id∈ Rd×d identity matrix and m is the number
of gradient outer products used to approximate the
Hessian. Given the positive-deﬁniteness of(2), the
quadratic form (1) is always nonnegative which
is why we will refer toδL(δw) as a loss increase
incurred by pruning.
Returning to our pruning problem, assume we
wish to identify a block of weights Q of a given
shape whose removal by zero-masking would incur minimum increase in loss. This leads to the
following constrained optimization problem:
min
δw
2δw⊤ˆF(w∗)δw
s.t. e⊤
kδw +wk = 0, ∀k∈ Q
(3)
where ek ∈ Rd stands for the k-th canonical
basis vector. Here, we will provide a generalized solution, which applies to general Q. First,
for convenience, we express the system of |Q|
equality constraints in matrix-equation form as
EQδw + EQw∗ = 0, where EQ ∈ R|Q|×d is
a matrix composed of the corresponding canonical basis vectors ek (∀k∈ Q) arranged in rows.
This optimization problem can be solved with the
method of Lagrange multipliers. Speciﬁcally, we
wish to ﬁnd stationary points of the Lagrangian
L(δw, λ), where λ∈ R|Q| denotes a vector of
Lagrange multipliers. Solving the system of equations ∂L(δw,λ)
∂δw = 0 and ∂L(δw,λ)
∂λ = 0 yields the
following optimal weight update:
δw∗ =−ˆF−1(w∗)E⊤
Q
(
EQˆF−1(w∗)E⊤
Q
)−1
EQw∗
which prunes a set of weights Q and updates the
remaining weights to preserve the loss. Now, the
corresponding loss increase incurred by the optimal weight update δw∗ can be expressed as the
saliency score of weightsQ, which we denote by:
ρQ = 1
2 (EQw∗)⊤
(
EQˆF−1(w∗)E⊤
Q
)−1
EQw∗.
We use this saliency/importance score to rank
groups of weights for pruning. As a sanity check,
if we prune a single weightwj at a time, our derivations will yield the standard formulas of (Hassibi
and Stork, 1992). The full version of Singh and
Alistarh (2020) provided a slightly less general
derivation for the blocked case, under additional
assumptions.
3.2 An Efﬁcient Implementation
Directly implementing the previously described
approach for LLMs, where number of weights
w∈ Rd is huge, is infeasible. In particular, this is
due to the dependence on the inverse of the empirical Fisher information matrix ˆF−1(w)∈ Rd×d,
appearing in formulations of the saliency score and
of the optimal weight update. We now describe
how to circumvent these issues.
3.2.1 Pruning the optimal set of weights
Assume a gradual pruning setup, in which at each
pruning step we wish to prune a model to a target sparsity s ∈ (0, 1], effectively zeroing out
s×d weights, in groups of size |Q|. Typically
s×d≫| Q|, meaning that we want to remove
multiple groups at the same time. Finding the
optimal set of s×d
|Q| groups is an intractable combinatorial problem, due to all possible correlations
between them, given by the binomial coefﬁcient(n
k
)
, where n = d
|Q| andk = s×d
|Q| . This problem
can be alleviated by ignoring correlations between
different groups of weightsQ, and solving only for
correlations between the weights within the same
group. In practice, this boils down to evaluating the
saliency scoreρQ for each groupQ, and pruning
the s×d
|Q| groups with the lowest score. As pruning
many weights in the same step can make the Taylor
approximation of the loss function less accurate,
one can consider pruning with multiple smaller
sub-steps with recomputations of the Hessian approximation in between (without intermediate ﬁnetuning). While this can further improve the quality
of the pruning step (Frantar et al., 2021), we do not
implement this additional optimization since the
competing methods do not utilize recomputations.

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: of gradient outer products used to approximate the | Directly implementing the previously described
Row 1: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: Hessian. Given the positive-definiteness of (2), the | Directly implementing the previously described: approach for LLMs, where number of weights
Row 2: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: quadratic form (1) is always nonnegative which | Directly implementing the previously described: w ∈ Rd is huge, is infeasible. In particular, this is
Row 3: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: is why we will refer to δL(δw) as a loss increase | Directly implementing the previously described: due to the dependence on the inverse of the empirRow 4: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: incurred by pruning. | Directly implementing the previously described: ical Fisher information matrix F̂−1(w) ∈ Rd×d,
Row 5: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: Returning to our pruning problem, assume we | Directly implementing the previously described: appearing in formulations of the saliency score and
Row 6: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: wish to identify a block of weights Q of a given | Directly implementing the previously described: of the optimal weight update. We now describe
Row 7: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: shape whose removal by zero-masking would in- | Directly implementing the previously described: how to circumvent these issues.
Row 8: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: cur minimum increase in loss. This leads to the | Directly implementing the previously described:
Row 9: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: following constrained optimization problem: | Directly implementing the previously described: 3.2.1 Pruning the optimal set of weights
Row 10: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: | Directly implementing the previously described: Assume a gradual pruning setup, in which at each
Row 11: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: ∗min 1 δw F̂(w > )δw | Directly implementing the previously described: pruning step we wish to prune a model to a tarRow 12: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: δw 2 (3) | Directly implementing the previously described: get sparsity s ∈ (0, 1], effectively zeroing out
Row 13: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: >s.t. ek δw + wk = 0, ∀k ∈ Q | Directly implementing the previously described: s × d weights, in groups of size |Q|. Typically
Row 14: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: | Directly implementing the previously described: s × d |Q|, meaning that we want to remove
Row 15: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: where e k ∈ R dstands for the k-th canonical | Directly implementing the previously described: multiple groups at the same time. Finding the
Row 16: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: basis vector. Here, we will provide a general- | Directly implementing the previously described: optimal set of s×d groups is an intractable combiRow 17: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: | Directly implementing the previously described: |Q|
Row 18: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: ized solution, which applies to general Q. First, | Directly implementing the previously described: natorial problem, due to all possible correlations
Row 19: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: for convenience, we express the system of |Q| | Directly implementing the previously described: between them, given by the binomial coefficient
Row 20: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: | Directly implementing the previously described: ( )
Row 21: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: equality constraints in matrix-equation form as | Directly implementing the previously described: n , where n = d and k = s×d . This problem
Row 22: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: | Directly implementing the previously described: k |Q| |Q|
Row 23: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: E δw + E w∗ = 0, where E ∈ R|Q|×dQ Q Q is | Directly implementing the previously described: can be alleviated by ignoring correlations between
Row 24: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: a matrix composed of the corresponding canon- | Directly implementing the previously described: different groups of weights Q, and solving only for
Row 25: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: ical basis vectors ek (∀k ∈ Q) arranged in rows. | Directly implementing the previously described: correlations between the weights within the same
Row 26: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: This optimization problem can be solved with the | Directly implementing the previously described: group. In practice, this boils down to evaluating the
Row 27: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: method of Lagrange multipliers. Specifically, we | Directly implementing the previously described: saliency score ρQ for each group Q, and pruning
Row 28: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: wish to find stationary points of the Lagrangian | Directly implementing the previously described: the s×d groups with the lowest score. As pruning
Row 29: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: | Directly implementing the previously described: |Q|
Row 30: of gradient outer products used to approximate the: L(δw,λ), where λ ∈ R|Q| denotes a vector of | Directly implementing the previously described: many weights in the same step can make the Taylor
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
3.2.2 Inverse empirical Fisher computation
The key space and time complexity cost of the
above procedure is computing products with the
inverse empirical Fisher. A direct approach would
be to perform a block-wise diagonal approximation
of this matrix (which we detail next), and perform
direct block inversion. However, we found experimentally that this approach is too expensive
in terms of time, and quite numerically-sensitive.
As an alternative, we rely on the fact that the matrix we wish to invert is a sum of rank-1 matrices, and employ the Woodbury/Sherman-Morrison
(WSM) inversion formula. Speciﬁcally, given a
sum (A + uv⊤) of an invertible matrix A and an
outer product of vectors u and v with compatible dimensions, the inverse (A + uv⊤)−1 can be
exactly calculated as A−1− A−1uv⊤A−1
1+v⊤A−1u . Placing the expression of the empirical Fisher in the
WSM formula, we obtain the following recursive
formulation, wherem is the number of gradients
employed in the approximation:
ˆF−1(w) =ˆF−1
m (w) =
(
ˆFm−1(w) + 1
m∇Lm(w)∇L⊤
m(w)
)−1
.
Unrolling the recursion withˆF−1
0 (w) = 1
λ Id, we
can obtain an iterative formula to exactly calculate
the inverse of the empirical Fisher matrix as
ˆF−1(w) =ˆF−1
m (w) =
λ Id−∑m
i=1
(ˆF−1
i−1(w)∇Li(w))(ˆF−1
i−1(w)∇Li(w))
⊤
m+∇L⊤
i (w)ˆF−1
i−1(w)∇Li(w) .
The iterative formulation enjoys a number of computational advantages over the direct implementation. The most notable ones are 1) avoiding explicit
calls to the expensive and dampening-sensitive matrix inversions, and 2) allowing successive updates
of the inverse as new gradients are computed, never
needing to store allm gradients of sized and thus
signiﬁcantly reducing memory requirements.
3.3 Memory and run-time complexity
Computing and storing the inverse empirical Fisher
ˆF−1(w) ∈ Rd×d is prohibitively expensive for
modern LLMs, which have hundreds of millions of
parameters, due to the quadratic complexity on the
number of weightsd. However, Singh and Alistarh
(2020) have shown that a diagonal block-wise approximation of the empirical Fisher matrix can be
very accurate for pruning of convolutional neural
networks. We adapt the same approach here, in
the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width
B along the main diagonal, memory requirements
for the computation of the inverse Fisher matrix
are reduced from the quadraticO(d2) to a linear
O(Bd) dependence on the number of weights d.
At the same time, run-time complexity relaxes
fromO(md2) toO(mBd). As we will show, this
computation can be efﬁciently and accurately performed for moderate values ofm andB.
Another alternative we investigated was the
matrix-free approach of Frantar et al. (2021), which
does not require a block-wise approximation and
has complexity Θ(dm). However, our investigation showed that this approach required high values
ofm to be accurate (Appendix Figure 3), which
leads to excessive memory cost in the case of
BERT models.
3.4 Efﬁcient and scalable implementation
On the practical side, we have identiﬁed general
hyper-parametersB = 50 for the block size, and
m = 1024 for the number of gradients which produce state-of-the-art results for all analyzed BERT
models (for more details please see Appendix A.4),
while still being able to ﬁt on the 24GB RTX 3090
GPU. We reﬂect upon the computational costs
in more detail in Appendix A.3. Moreover, for
these parameter values, the block-wise approximation ofˆF−1(w) can be implemented very efﬁciently on modern accelerators. Speciﬁcally, we
take advantage of the fact that such hardware favors batched matrix operations, and that the blocks
of sizeB×B inˆF−1(w) are independent. With
NB = d
B we refer to the total number of blocks,
i.e. the batch-dimension. The procedure works as
follows. First, we compute batched matrix-vector
productsˆF−1
i−1(w)∇Li(w)∈ RNB×B and scalar
denominatorsm +∇L⊤
i (w)ˆF−1
i−1(w)∇Li(w)∈
RNB. Then, we update the inverse Fisher for each
block by computing the scalar-scaled outer products
(
ˆF−1
i−1(w)∇Li(w)
)(
ˆF−1
i−1(w)∇Li(w)
)⊤
of shape RNB×B×B.
4 Experimental Validation
To ease reproducibility, we conduct our experiments in modiﬁed versions of the popular
open-source libraries: Transformers (Wolf et al.,

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: above procedure is computing products with the | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width
Row 1: above procedure is computing products with the: inverse empirical Fisher. A direct approach would | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: B along the main diagonal, memory requirements
Row 2: above procedure is computing products with the: be to perform a block-wise diagonal approximation | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: for the computation of the inverse Fisher matrix
Row 3: above procedure is computing products with the: | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: 2
Row 4: above procedure is computing products with the: of this matrix (which we detail next), and perform | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: are reduced from the quadratic O(d ) to a linear
Row 5: above procedure is computing products with the: direct block inversion. However, we found ex- | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: O(Bd) dependence on the number of weights d.
Row 6: above procedure is computing products with the: perimentally that this approach is too expensive | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: At the same time, run-time complexity relaxes
Row 7: above procedure is computing products with the: | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: 2
Row 8: above procedure is computing products with the: in terms of time, and quite numerically-sensitive. | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: from O(md ) to O(mBd). As we will show, this
Row 9: above procedure is computing products with the: As an alternative, we rely on the fact that the ma- | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: computation can be efficiently and accurately perRow 10: above procedure is computing products with the: trix we wish to invert is a sum of rank-1 matri- | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: formed for moderate values of m and B.
Row 11: above procedure is computing products with the: ces, and employ the Woodbury/Sherman-Morrison | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: Another alternative we investigated was the
Row 12: above procedure is computing products with the: (WSM) inversion formula. Specifically, given a | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: matrix-free approach of Frantar et al. (2021), which
Row 13: above procedure is computing products with the: sum (A + uv>) of an invertible matrix A and an | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: does not require a block-wise approximation and
Row 14: above procedure is computing products with the: outer product of vectors u and v with compati- | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: has complexity Θ(dm). However, our investigaRow 15: above procedure is computing products with the: ble dimensions, the inverse (A + uv>)−1 can be | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: tion showed that this approach required high values
Row 16: above procedure is computing products with the: exactly calculated as A−1 − A 1+v −1 uv > −1 A > −1Au. Plac- | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: of m to be accurate (Appendix Figure 3), which
Row 17: above procedure is computing products with the: ing the expression of the empirical Fisher in the | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: leads to excessive memory cost in the case of
Row 18: above procedure is computing products with the: WSM formula, we obtain the following recursive | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: BERT models.
Row 19: above procedure is computing products with the: formulation, where m is the number of gradients | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width:
Row 20: above procedure is computing products with the: | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: 3.4 Efficient and scalable implementation
Row 21: above procedure is computing products with the: employed in the approximation: | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width:
Row 22: above procedure is computing products with the: | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: On the practical side, we have identified general
Row 23: above procedure is computing products with the: F̂−1(w) = F̂−1m (w) = | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: hyper-parameters B = 50 for the block size, and
Row 24: above procedure is computing products with the: ( )−1 | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: m = 1024 for the number of gradients which proRow 25: above procedure is computing products with the: F̂ m−1(w) + ∇Lm(w)∇Lm 1>m(w) . | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: duce state-of-the-art results for all analyzed BERT
Row 26: above procedure is computing products with the: | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: models (for more details please see Appendix A.4),
Row 27: above procedure is computing products with the: −1Unrolling the recursion with F̂ (w) = 10 Id, weλ | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: while still being able to fit on the 24GB RTX 3090
Row 28: above procedure is computing products with the: can obtain an iterative formula to exactly calculate | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: GPU. We reflect upon the computational costs
Row 29: above procedure is computing products with the: the inverse of the empirical Fisher matrix as | the context of LLMs. Thus, for blocks of width: in more detail in Appendix A.3. Moreover, for
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
2020), and SparseML (Kurtz et al., 2020). All
of our experiments are using publicly available
datasets via Lhoest et al. (2021) and focus on the
BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the
most commonly used LLMs, composed of 12 transformer layers with 110M parameters. Following
community standards, we prune encoder’s weights
(85M) and report sparsities relative to this number.
All of our models, compression recipes and the full
implementation will be made public.
4.1 Downstream Unstructured Pruning
We ﬁrst revisit the accuracy-compression trade-off
for pruning on downstream tasks.
Goals and setup. We compare existing approaches, notably Movement Pruning (MvP) (Sanh
et al., 2020) and Lottery Ticket (LT-BERT) (Chen
et al., 2020), against the gradual unstructured
oBERT method, introduced in Section 3. Our experiments evaluate performance on a variety of
downstream (English) tasks commonly used to
evaluate model compression: question answering
SQuAD v1.1 (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), sentence
classiﬁcation Quora Duplicate Query Dataset QQP
(Shankar et al., 2017), and natural language inference MNLI (Williams et al., 2018).
Comparison with MvP. For a fair comparison
with MvP, we consider the 10-epoch gradual pruning setup used to obtain the best results by Sanh
et al. (2020). Speciﬁcally, we start from the
BERTBASE model and perform 2 epochs of ﬁnetuning, followed by 6 epochs of pruning, and 2 further epochs of ﬁne-tuning of the compressed model.
We impose a global sparsity distribution over all
layers, prune with oBERT two times per epoch,
and use KD from the ﬁne-tunedBERTBASE teacher.
For oBERT pruning we usem = 1024 gradients,
block size B = 50 , and dampening λ = 10−7
to approximate the inverse Hessian matrix. In
all of our runs, the ﬁrst pruning step prunes 70%
of weights and then follows the cubic interpolation (Zhu and Gupta, 2018) to the target sparsity.
This large ﬁrst pruning step gives more time to
recover from the later pruning steps, which impose higher sparsities. All hyper-parameters are
described in detail in Appendix A.5, and the results
are given in Table 1 (in the 10 Epochs section).
We observe that Optimal BERT Surgeon outperforms Movement Pruning by a signiﬁcant margin,
more than 2 points of F1 score at the same sparTable 1: Downstream tasks dev-set performance of
pruned BERTBASE models. ( ∗ approximate results as
the exact numbers are not available.)
Task BERT
BASE Spars. Soft
MvP
oBERT
(ours)
LTBERT
oBERT
(ours)
Epochs 10 Epochs 30 Epochs
SQuAD
F1 88.54
80%
90%
97%
84.90
82.30
87.98
84.65
86.54
68.00∗
89.04
88.31
85.98
MNLI
m-acc 84.54
80%
90%
97%
81.20
79.50
83.20
81.00
82.60
75.00∗
84.32
83.79
81.77
QQP
Acc 91.06
80%
90%
97%
90.20
89.10
90.89
90.23
90.30
90.00
91.57
91.35
90.87
sity. Remarkably, the model pruned with oBERT to
97% sparsity has similar accuracy to MvP-pruned
model at 90% sparsity, which has roughly 3x
more weights. This reinforces the effectiveness
of second-order information for pruning.
Extended pruning and ﬁne-tuning. Next, we examine effects of extending the gradual schedule
to 30 epochs, matching the setup used for LTBERT (Chen et al., 2020). The only difference
compared to our 10 epoch setup is that we now
prune with oBERT every four epochs, and rewind
learning rate after each pruning step. The extended
setup leaves more time to recover from pruning,
which reﬂects in the improved results in Table 1
(30 Epochs section). We report the mean over three
runs. For additional evaluation metrics and standard deviations please see Tables 12 and 15 in the
Appendix. The results show a clear accuracy difference between oBERT and LT-BERT, especially
at high sparsities. This difference is justiﬁed since
the LT based approach attempts to mainly transfer
network connectivity, whereas the oBERT can also
beneﬁt from the weight values. Finally, we examined the impact of extended setup with Soft MvP
on SQuAD, targeting 90% sparsity (not shown in
the Table), leading to an (F1, EM) combination
of (87.42, 79.83) for MvP. The F1 gap in favor of
oBERT is lower than at 10 epochs, suggesting that
extended ﬁnetuning helps all methods; yet, it is far
from negligible.
4.2 Upstream Unstructured Pruning
An appealing alternative to downstream pruning
is to compress models upstream, on the semisupervised pre-training task (Zafrir et al., 2021).
Given the upstream pruned model, computational

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the | BERT | Unnamed: 0 | Soft oBERT | Unnamed: 1 | LT- oBERT
Row 1: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: most commonly used LLMs, composed of 12 trans- Task | BERT: BASE | Unnamed: 0: Spars. | Soft oBERT: MvP (ours) | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: BERT (ours)
Row 2: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: former layers with 110M parameters. Following | BERT: Epochs | Unnamed: 0: | Soft oBERT: 10 Epochs | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: 30 Epochs
Row 3: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: community standards, we prune encoder’s weights | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: 80% | Soft oBERT: - - | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: 86.54 89.04
Row 4: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: SQuAD | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: | Soft oBERT: | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: ∗
Row 5: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: (85M) and report sparsities relative to this number. F1 | BERT: 88.54 | Unnamed: 0: 90% | Soft oBERT: 84.90 87.98 | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: 68.00 88.31
Row 6: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: 97% | Soft oBERT: 82.30 84.65 | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: - 85.98
Row 7: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: All of our models, compression recipes and the full | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: | Soft oBERT: | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT:
Row 8: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: 84.32implementation will be made public. MNLI | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: 80% | Soft oBERT: - - | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: 82.60 ∗
Row 9: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: | BERT: 84.54 | Unnamed: 0: 90% | Soft oBERT: 81.20 83.20 | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: 75.00 83.79
Row 10: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: m-acc | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: | Soft oBERT: | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT:
Row 11: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: 97% | Soft oBERT: 79.50 81.00 | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: - 81.77
Row 12: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: 4.1 Downstream Unstructured Pruning | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: 80% | Soft oBERT: - - | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: 90.30 91.57
Row 13: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: QQP | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: | Soft oBERT: | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT:
Row 14: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: | BERT: 91.06 | Unnamed: 0: 90% | Soft oBERT: 90.20 90.89 | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: 90.00 91.35
Row 15: BERTBASE model (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the: We first revisit the accuracy-compression trade-off Acc | BERT: | Unnamed: 0: 97% | Soft oBERT: 89.10 90.23 | Unnamed: 1: | LT- oBERT: - 90.87
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
requirements for obtaining downstream ﬁne-tuned
models are signiﬁcantly reduced, as only ﬁnetuning of the remaining weights is necessary.
Goals and setup. To compare with existing approaches, notably Prune OFA (Zafrir et al., 2021)
and LT-BERT (Chen et al., 2020), we gradually
prune with oBERT directly at upstream datasets,
BookCorpus and English Wikipedia, and then ﬁnetune the remaining unpruned weights on the subset
of GLUE tasks.
Teacher preparation. Following Liu et al. (2019),
we start with the HuggingFace BERTBASE uncased
model, and ﬁne-tune it for additional 10 epochs
only on the masked language modeling task.
Pruning at upstream. Once the distillation
teacher is trained, we gradually prune and ﬁne-tune
the BERTBASE model for 3 epochs, using KD from
the dense teacher. We prune four times per epoch,
and rewind learning rate to the initial value after
each pruning step. Hyper-parameters for oBERT
are the same as for downstream pruning in 4.1; a
full description can be found in Appendix A.6.
Sparse-transfer to downstream. To evaluate the
resulting upstream-pruned models, we ﬁnetune the
unpruned weights on downstream tasks with KD
from the ﬁne-tuned BERTBASE model. For a fair
comparison with Prune OFA, we ﬁne-tune for 8
epochs. The results in Table 2 show that sparse
models produced by oBERT outperform state-ofthe-art methods by signiﬁcant margins. We report
the mean over four runs. For additional evaluation metrics and standard deviations please see Appendix Tables 13 and 16. It is worth emphasizing
that in contrast to Prune OFA, which performed extensive hyper-parameter tuning for sparse-transfer,
our recipe is simple and general across downstream
tasks: 8 epochs of ﬁne-tuning with linearly decaying learning rate. This suggests that sparse
pre-trained models found by oBERT constitute a
strong starting point for sparse transfer learning,
which can be further improved by task-speciﬁc
hyper-parameter tuning.
4.3 Compound Compression for CPUs
To probe the potential practical impact of our approach, we specialize the technique for deployment
on CPUs, corresponding to “edge” deployments.
Speciﬁcally, we tailor our sparse models to the
DeepSparse (NeuralMagic, 2021) sparsity-aware
runtime, by compounding unstructured pruning
Table 2: Sparse-transfer dev-set performance of
upstream-pruned BERT BASE models. ( ∗ approximate
results as the exact numbers are not available.)
Task BERT
BASE Sparsity LTBERT
Prune
OFA
oBERT
(ours)
SQuAD
F1 88.54 90%
97%
68.00∗
87.25
88.49
84.92
MNLI
m-acc 84.54 90%
97%
75.00∗
81.45
83.40
80.91
QQP
Acc 91.06 90%
97%
90.00
90.93
90.99
90.33
SST-2
Acc 93.01 90% 85.00∗ 90.88 92.20
QNLI
Acc 91.25 90% 80.00∗ 89.07 89.97
with additional compression techniques.
Direct layer dropping. The competitive results
obtained at high sparsities in sections 4.1 and 4.2
suggest that BERTBASE may be overparameterized
for downstream tasks. To improve compression
ratio and inference speed, we apply “direct” layer
dropping: we initially drop all but 3 or 6 of the
BERT’s 12 layers. We drop layers from our upstream teacher, and, following (Turc et al., 2019),
ﬁne-tune them with KD in the same setup used
to prepare the upstream teacher. These 3 and 6
layer models are used as starting points for downstream pruning. More sophisticated layer dropping
techniques (Fan et al., 2019), could bring further
accuracy gains; we leave this for future work.
Block pruning and QAT. High-performance inference usually beneﬁts more from (semi) structured sparsity patterns than from the unstructured
ones. Hence, we employ the generalized oBERT
formulation introduced in the section 3 and prune
weights in the 4-block pattern, meaning that contiguous blocks of 4 weights are either set to zero
or kept dense. Both pruning types, unstructured
and 4-block, can be leveraged for computational
speedups with the DeepSparse runtime, but 4block pruning coupled with INT8 quantization can
provide further performance gains. For quantization, we apply standard quantization-aware training (QAT) (Jacob et al., 2018) on top of the 4-block
models (see Appendix A.7 for a full description).
Compounding for deployment. To determine the
impact of different compression schemes, we investigate unstructured and 4-block pruning of the 3, 6,
and 12-layer models. For all runs, we use the same
set of hyper-parameters from the extended pruning

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: and LT-BERT (Chen et al., 2020), we gradually | ∗SQuAD 90% | 68.00 | Unnamed: 0 | 87.25 | 88.49
Row 1: and LT-BERT (Chen et al., 2020), we gradually: | ∗SQuAD 90%: 88.54 | 68.00: | Unnamed: 0: | 87.25: | 88.49:
Row 2: and LT-BERT (Chen et al., 2020), we gradually: prune with oBERT directly at upstream datasets, | ∗SQuAD 90%: F1 97% | 68.00: - | Unnamed: 0: | 87.25: - | 88.49: 84.92
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=2]
Columns: BookCorpus and English Wikipedia, and then fine- | ∗MNLI 90% | 75.00 | Unnamed: 0 | 81.45 | 83.40
Row 1: BookCorpus and English Wikipedia, and then fine-: | ∗MNLI 90%: 84.54 | 75.00: | Unnamed: 0: | 81.45: | 83.40:
Row 2: BookCorpus and English Wikipedia, and then fine-: tune the remaining unpruned weights on the subset | ∗MNLI 90%: m-acc 97% | 75.00: - | Unnamed: 0: | 81.45: - | 83.40: 80.91
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
Table 3: F1 score of the 3, 6, and 12-layer models
compound-compressed on the SQuADv1.1.
Layers Sparsity Unstructured 4-block +QAT
0%
80%
90%
89.48
89.04
88.31
89.48
88.57
87.57
89.06
87.89
86.68
0%
80%
90%
88.32
88.20
86.78
88.32
87.00
85.34
87.94
86.10
84.59
0%
80%
90%
84.66
84.08
82.50
84.66
82.79
80.69
84.25
82.04
79.66
F1 recall (%)
30Magnitude of improvement
Inference speed
Model compression
Figure 2: F1 recall on the SQuADv1.1 task relative to
improvements in CPU-inference speed and model size.
and ﬁne-tuning setup in Section 4.1. The results
are given in Table 3, where we also report accuracy
of the corresponding dense models (0% sparsity)
in the same setup. For additional evaluation metrics, please see Table 14. The results indicate that
compression methods can be combined without
model collapse, although the accuracy drops do
compound. The fact that the layer-dropped models
are also highly compressible suggests that structured and ﬁne-grained (unstructured) compression
are complementary. We ﬁnd it remarkable that
our 6-layer unstructured oBERT-pruned model is
competitive with the 12-layer MvP-pruned model
when both are pruned to 90% sparsity.
Practical trade-offs. We now benchmark these
models in end-to-end fashion, both in terms of
model size and inference speed. For model size,
we report size of the checkpoint in MB after standard gzip compression. For inference speed, we
report number of items per second (throughput) on
the well-established SQuAD v1.1 CPU-inference
benchmark with a sequence length of 128 and a
batch size of 32. Figure 2 depicts relative accuracy versus magnitude of improvement in speed
and model size. As baseline for full recovery, we
follow the community-standard e.g. (Sanh et al.,
2020), and adopt the dense BERTBASE model with
88.54 F1 score. The baseline for inference speed
is dense BERTBASE inference with DeepSparse,
which matches the industry-standard ONNX Runtime inference engine. Results suggest a roughlylinear trade-off between compression and accuracy
loss, with a compression jump around 1% accuracy
drop, due to quantization being applied. Speciﬁcally, we observe 8.4x higher inference speedup at
< 1% accuracy drop, 10x speedup at < 2% drop,
15x speedup at < 3% drop, and 29x speedup at <
7.5% accuracy drop. This shows how compound
compression can optimize LLMs to various latencies. See Appendix Table 17 for full results.
4.4 Pruning for GPU speedups (N:M
sparsity)
Even though our previous results targeted CPUs
for deployment, we now show that our pruning
approach can also be relevant to GPUs. We apply the semi-structured variant of oBERT to impose the 2-out-of-4 sparsity pattern, which is supported on NVIDIA Ampere GPUs (Mishra et al.,
2021). More speciﬁcally, we prune in one-shot,
and compare against the magnitude pruning baseline in Table 4. All other methods require full
ﬁne-tuning, and thus don’t support the one-shot
setup. oBERT signiﬁcantly outperforms magnitude pruning, and with only 1-epoch of ﬁne-tuning
it is able to fully recover dense accuracy with (F1,
EM) = (88.58, 81.16). With this sparsity pattern,
the pruned model achieves 1.85x speedup on Ampere devices.
Table 4: One-shot 2:4 pruning of the ﬁne-tuned
BERTBASE model.
Task BERTBASE Magnitude oBERT (ours)
SQuAD
F1 / EM 88.54 / 81.41 49.97 / 35.24 83.17 / 74.18
5 Discussion
Comparison with concurrent work. Concurrent
work introduced PLATON (Zhang et al., 2022),
which addresses unstructured pruning of BERT
models via estimates of conﬁdence bounds. It does
not make use of KD, so for a fair comparison we

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: Layers | Sparsity | Unstructured | 4-block | +QAT | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: Layers: | Sparsity: | Unstructured: | 4-block: | +QAT: | Unnamed: 0: 88.54 F1 score. The baseline for inference speed
Row 2: Layers: | Sparsity: 0% | Unstructured: 89.48 | 4-block: 89.48 | +QAT: 89.06 | Unnamed: 0: is dense BERTBASE inference with DeepSparse,
Row 3: Layers: 12.0 | Sparsity: 80% | Unstructured: 89.04 | 4-block: 88.57 | +QAT: 87.89 | Unnamed: 0:
Row 4: Layers: | Sparsity: 90% | Unstructured: 88.31 | 4-block: 87.57 | +QAT: 86.68 | Unnamed: 0: which matches the industry-standard ONNX RunRow 5: Layers: | Sparsity: | Unstructured: | 4-block: | +QAT: | Unnamed: 0: time inference engine. Results suggest a roughlyRow 6: Layers: | Sparsity: 0% | Unstructured: 88.32 | 4-block: 88.32 | +QAT: 87.94 | Unnamed: 0:
Row 7: Layers: 6.0 | Sparsity: 80% | Unstructured: 88.2 | 4-block: 87.0 | +QAT: 86.1 | Unnamed: 0: linear trade-off between compression and accuracy
Row 8: Layers: | Sparsity: 90% | Unstructured: 86.78 | 4-block: 85.34 | +QAT: 84.59 | Unnamed: 0: loss, with a compression jump around 1% accuracy
Row 9: Layers: | Sparsity: 0% | Unstructured: 84.66 | 4-block: 84.66 | +QAT: 84.25 | Unnamed: 0: drop, due to quantization being applied. SpecifiRow 10: Layers: 3.0 | Sparsity: 80% | Unstructured: 84.08 | 4-block: 82.79 | +QAT: 82.04 | Unnamed: 0: cally, we observe 8.4x higher inference speedup at
Row 11: Layers: | Sparsity: 90% | Unstructured: 82.5 | 4-block: 80.69 | +QAT: 79.66 | Unnamed: 0:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
rerun our experiments without KD as well. Contrary to PLATON, which reports best results after
an extensive hyper-parameter search for each task
independently, we apply our sparse-transfer setup
with the upstream pruned model and only sweep
for the number of epochs ∈ [1, 8]. We employ
early stopping to prevent overﬁtting on smaller
GLUE tasks. As can be seen from Table 5, oBERT
outperforms PLATON across all tasks.
Table 5: Compressed BERT BASE models to 90% sparsity on GLUE tasks without knowledge distillation.
Task BERTBASE PLATON oBERT
(ours)
MNLI
m / mm 84.6 / 83.4 82.0 / 82.2 82.2 / 82.5
QQP
Acc / F1 91.5 / 88.5 90.2 / 86.8 90.4 / 87.1
QNLI
Acc 91.3 88.9 89.3
MRPC
Acc / F1 86.4 / 90.3 84.3 / 88.8 85.6 / 89.3
SST-2
Acc 92.7 90.5 92.0
CoLA
Mcc 58.3 44.3 48.47
STS-B
Pear / Spear 90.2 / 89.7 87.4 / 87.1 88.0 / 87.6
Broader comparison. We now contrast our
compound-compressed BERTBASE models relative
to alternative compression techniques. We compare against DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019), TinyBERT (Jiao et al., 2020), and Block Pruning For
Faster Transformers (Hybrid Filled MvP) (Lagunas
et al., 2021). DistilBERT leverages KD during pretraining and ﬁne-tuning to obtain a 6-layer model
ﬁne-tuned for a speciﬁc downstream task. TinyBERT makes use of a specialized Transformer-KD
scheme to distill knowledge and intermediate representations at both stages, pre-training and ﬁnetuning on a speciﬁc task. In contrast, we use a
simpler approach and employ KD from teacher’s
outputs only. Hybrid Filled MvP (Lagunas et al.,
2021) employs semi-structured pruning and weight
reintroduction. The comparison is given in Table 6, where we report the number of unpruned
encoder weights as size, compression ratio and inference speedup relative to the dense BERTBASE in
the same inference environment, and F1 score on
the dev-set of the SQuAD v1.1 dataset. The results suggest that our compressed models improve
upon the current state-of-the-art techniques, setting
new very competitive baselines with respect to all
metrics: accuracy, model size, and inference speed.
Table 6: Compressed BERT BASE models on the
SQuADv1.1 task. (oBERT 6,80 stands for the 6-layer
model pruned to 80% sparsity.)
Model Size Compr. Speedup F1 Dev.
BERTBASE 85.0M 1.00x 1.00x 88.54
< 6-layers
TinyBERT4 4.5M 18.88x 9.40x 82.10 GPU
oBERT3,90 2.1M 40.00x 14.80x 82.50 CPU
6-layers
DistilBERT 42.5M 2.00x 2.00x 86.90 GPU
TinyBERT6 42.5M 2.00x 2.00x 87.50 GPU
oBERT6,80 8.5M 10.00x 6.38x 88.20 CPU
12-layers
Hybrid F. MvP 30.7M 2.76x 1.84x 88.70 GPU
oBERT12,80 17.0M 5.00x 3.38x 89.04 CPU
BERTLARGE results. Most of our results presented in Section 4 targeted the widely-adopted
BERTBASE model. This gave us an opportunity for
a fair comparison against many different methods.
To verify that our approach does not pertain only to
the BERTBASE model, in Table 7 we present downstream pruning results on the three times larger
BERTLARGE model and the SQuADv1.1 task. As
can be seen from the Table, even the model pruned
with oBERT at double the sparsity (95%) outperforms Prune OFA (90%).
Table 7: Compressed BERT LARGE models on the
SQuADv1.1 task.
BERTLARGE
F1 / EM Sparsity Prune
OFA
oBERT
(ours)
91.22 / 84.45 90% 90.20 / 83.35 91.07 / 84.61
91.22 / 84.45 95% NA 90.29 / 83.58
MLPerf Inference Benchmark. Motivated by
our state-of-the-art results across-the-board, we
apply our full compound compression pipeline
to compress BERTLARGE and MobileBERT (Sun
et al., 2020b) models in the context of the industrial MLPerf Inference Benchmark1. In brief,
we were able to achieve order-of-magnitude improvements in terms of model size and inference
speedups, while maintaining >99% of the dense
1https://mlcommons.org/en/

[TABLE page=9 index=1]
Columns: independently, we apply our sparse-transfer setup | metrics: accuracy, model size, and inference speed.
Row 1: independently, we apply our sparse-transfer setup: with the upstream pruned model and only sweep | metrics: accuracy, model size, and inference speed.:
Row 2: independently, we apply our sparse-transfer setup: for the number of epochs ∈ [1, 8]. We employ | metrics: accuracy, model size, and inference speed.: Table 6: Compressed BERTBASE models on the
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=9 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | oBERT | oBERT3,90 2.1M | 40.00x | 14.80x | 82.50 | CPU
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Task | Unnamed: 1: BERTBASE | Unnamed: 2: PLATON | oBERT: | oBERT3,90 2.1M: | 40.00x: | 14.80x: | 82.50: | CPU:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | oBERT: (ours) | oBERT3,90 2.1M: 6-layers | 40.00x: | 14.80x: | 82.50: | CPU:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: MNLI | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | oBERT: | oBERT3,90 2.1M: DistilBERT 42.5M | 40.00x: 2.00x | 14.80x: 2.00x | 82.50: 86.9 | CPU: GPU
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: 84.6 / 83.4 | Unnamed: 2: 82.0 / 82.2 | oBERT: 82.2 / 82.5 | oBERT3,90 2.1M: | 40.00x: | 14.80x: | 82.50: | CPU:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: m / mm | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | oBERT: | oBERT3,90 2.1M: TinyBERT GPU642.5M | 40.00x: 2.00x | 14.80x: 2.00x | 82.50: 87.5 | CPU:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | oBERT: | oBERT3,90 2.1M: oBERT6,80 8.5M | 40.00x: 10.00x | 14.80x: 6.38x | 82.50: 88.2 | CPU: CPU
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: QQP | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | oBERT: | oBERT3,90 2.1M: | 40.00x: | 14.80x: | 82.50: | CPU:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: 91.5 / 88.5 | Unnamed: 2: 90.2 / 86.8 | oBERT: 90.4 / 87.1 | oBERT3,90 2.1M: | 40.00x: | 14.80x: | 82.50: | CPU:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: Acc / F1 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | oBERT: | oBERT3,90 2.1M: 12-layers | 40.00x: | 14.80x: | 82.50: | CPU:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | oBERT: | oBERT3,90 2.1M: Hybrid F. MvP 30.7M | 40.00x: 2.76x | 14.80x: 1.84x | 82.50: 88.7 | CPU: GPU
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: QNLI | Unnamed: 1: 91.3 | Unnamed: 2: 88.9 | oBERT: 89.3 | oBERT3,90 2.1M: oBERT12,80 17.0M | 40.00x: 5.00x | 14.80x: 3.38x | 82.50: 89.04 | CPU: CPU
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: Acc | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | oBERT: | oBERT3,90 2.1M: | 40.00x: | 14.80x: | 82.50: | CPU:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 10]
BERTLARGE accuracy. For details please see Appendix A.1, as well as our open-source submission.
6 Broader Impact
Our work is part of the general trend of producing inference efﬁcient models which approximate
performance of their larger bases. By and large,
this work should help increase model efﬁciency,
thereby reducing computational and ultimately
monetary cost of executing such models. Moreover, it could allow models to be used by those
who do not have access to expensive specialized
computing clusters: for instance, our main speedup
results are aimed at widely-available CPUs.
7 Limitations
As any academic study, our work is not without
its limitations. We split their discussion into limitations that are inherent to our method, and limitations of our present study ; the latter can be
overcome by extensions of our work. In the ﬁrst
category, we begin by highlighting the fact that
our second-order method relies on approximations,
which are inherent in order to scale such methods
to BERT scale. Prior studies, e.g. (Singh and Alistarh, 2020) have performed careful examinations
of the validity of these approximations in the context of CNN models. The strength of our empirical
results can be seen as indirect evidence that these
approximations apply to BERT models as well. A
second, technical, limitation is the fact that our
method requires non-trivial additional storage cost;
while we have shown that our experiments can be
executed on a single commodity GPU (NVIDIA
RTX 3090), this limits the range of devices on
which the technique may be applied. However, we
provide an efﬁcient and easy way to scale our approach with more GPUs, which is automatically
utilized in a multi-GPU environment.
Another limitation which we aim to remove in
future work is the focus on relatively ﬁne-grained
sparsity types, such as unstructured and semistructured pruning.
References
Tianlong Chen, Jonathan Frankle, Shiyu Chang, Sijia
Liu, Yang Zhang, Zhangyang Wang, and Michael
Carbin. 2020. The lottery ticket hypothesis for pretrained bert networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:15834–15846.
Matthieu Courbariaux, Itay Hubara, Daniel Soudry,
Ran El-Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Binarized neural networks: Training deep neural networks with weights and activations constrained to+
1 or-1. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02830.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Angela Fan, Edouard Grave, and Armand Joulin. 2019.
Reducing transformer depth on demand with structured dropout. In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
Wikimedia Foundation. Wikimedia downloads.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. 2018. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Elias Frantar, Eldar Kurtic, and Dan Alistarh. 2021. Mfac: Efﬁcient matrix-free approximations of secondorder information. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 34.
Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. 2019. The
state of sparsity in deep neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.09574.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. 2015. A
deep neural network compression pipeline: Pruning, quantization, huffman encoding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1510.00149, 10.
Babak Hassibi and David Stork. 1992. Second order
derivatives for network pruning: Optimal brain surgeon. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 5.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, et al. 2015.
Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2(7).
Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard, Hartwig
Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. 2018. Quantization and training of neural networks for efﬁcient
integer-arithmetic-only inference. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 2704–2713.

[TABLE page=10 index=1]
Columns: Our work is part of the general trend of produc- | works with weights and activations constrained to+
Row 1: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: ing inference efficient models which approximate | works with weights and activations constrained to+: 1 or-1. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02830.
Row 2: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: performance of their larger bases. By and large, | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 3: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: this work should help increase model efficiency, | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Row 4: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
Row 5: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: thereby reducing computational and ultimately | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 6: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: deep bidirectional transformers for language underRow 7: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: monetary cost of executing such models. More- | works with weights and activations constrained to+: standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
Row 8: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: over, it could allow models to be used by those | works with weights and activations constrained to+: of the North American Chapter of the Association
Row 9: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: who do not have access to expensive specialized | works with weights and activations constrained to+: for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Row 10: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: computing clusters: for instance, our main speedup | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
Row 11: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. AssociRow 12: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: results are aimed at widely-available CPUs. | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 13: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: ation for Computational Linguistics.
Row 14: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: 7 Limitations | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Angela Fan, Edouard Grave, and Armand Joulin. 2019.
Row 15: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Reducing transformer depth on demand with strucRow 16: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: As any academic study, our work is not without | works with weights and activations constrained to+: tured dropout. In International Conference on
Row 17: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: its limitations. We split their discussion into lim- | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Learning Representations.
Row 18: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: itations that are inherent to our method, and lim- | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 19: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Wikimedia Foundation. Wikimedia downloads.
Row 20: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: itations of our present study; the latter can be | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 21: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: overcome by extensions of our work. In the first | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. 2018. The lotRow 22: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: category, we begin by highlighting the fact that | works with weights and activations constrained to+: tery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neuRow 23: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: our second-order method relies on approximations, | works with weights and activations constrained to+: ral networks. In International Conference on LearnRow 24: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: ing Representations.
Row 25: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: which are inherent in order to scale such methods | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 26: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: to BERT scale. Prior studies, e.g. (Singh and Alis- | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Elias Frantar, Eldar Kurtic, and Dan Alistarh. 2021. MRow 27: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: tarh, 2020) have performed careful examinations | works with weights and activations constrained to+: fac: Efficient matrix-free approximations of secondRow 28: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: of the validity of these approximations in the con- | works with weights and activations constrained to+: order information. Advances in Neural Information
Row 29: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: text of CNN models. The strength of our empirical | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Processing Systems, 34.
Row 30: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: results can be seen as indirect evidence that these | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 31: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. 2019. The
Row 32: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: approximations apply to BERT models as well. A | works with weights and activations constrained to+: state of sparsity in deep neural networks. arXiv
Row 33: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: second, technical, limitation is the fact that our | works with weights and activations constrained to+: preprint arXiv:1902.09574.
Row 34: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: method requires non-trivial additional storage cost; | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 35: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. 2015. A
Row 36: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: while we have shown that our experiments can be | works with weights and activations constrained to+:
Row 37: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: | works with weights and activations constrained to+: deep neural network compression pipeline: PrunRow 38: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: executed on a single commodity GPU (NVIDIA | works with weights and activations constrained to+: ing, quantization, huffman encoding. arXiv preprint
Row 39: Our work is part of the general trend of produc-: RTX 3090), this limits the range of devices on | works with weights and activations constrained to+: arXiv:1510.00149, 10.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 11]
Xiaoqi Jiao, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang,
Xiao Chen, Linlin Li, Fang Wang, and Qun Liu.
2020. Tinybert: Distilling bert for natural language
understanding. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages
4163–4174.
Sehoon Kim, Sheng Shen, David Thorsley, Amir Gholami, Woosuk Kwon, Joseph Hassoun, and Kurt
Keutzer. 2022. Learned token pruning for transformers. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’22, page 784–794. Association for Computing Machinery.
Olga Kovaleva, Saurabh Kulshreshtha, Anna Rogers,
and Anna Rumshisky. 2021. BERT busters: Outlier
layernorm dimensions that disrupt BERT. CoRR,
abs/2105.06990.
Mark Kurtz, Justin Kopinsky, Rati Gelashvili, Alexander Matveev, John Carr, Michael Goin, William
Leiserson, Sage Moore, Bill Nell, Nir Shavit, and
Dan Alistarh. 2020. Inducing and exploiting activation sparsity for fast inference on deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Machine Learning , volume 119 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages
5533–5543, Virtual. PMLR.
François Lagunas, Ella Charlaix, Victor Sanh, and
Alexander Rush. 2021. Block pruning for faster
transformers. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 10619–10629, Online and Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yann LeCun, John Denker, and Sara Solla. 1989. Optimal brain damage. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2.
Quentin Lhoest, Albert Villanova del Moral, Yacine
Jernite, Abhishek Thakur, Patrick von Platen, Suraj
Patil, Julien Chaumond, Mariama Drame, Julien
Plu, Lewis Tunstall, Joe Davison, Mario Šaško,
Gunjan Chhablani, Bhavitvya Malik, Simon Brandeis, Teven Le Scao, Victor Sanh, Canwen Xu,
Nicolas Patry, Angelina McMillan-Major, Philipp
Schmid, Sylvain Gugger, Clément Delangue, Théo
Matussière, Lysandre Debut, Stas Bekman, Pierric Cistac, Thibault Goehringer, Victor Mustar,
François Lagunas, Alexander Rush, and Thomas
Wolf. 2021. Datasets: A community library for natural language processing. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations ,
pages 175–184. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. 2019.
Are sixteen heads really better than one? Advances
in neural information processing systems, 32.
Asit Mishra, Jorge Albericio Latorre, Jeff Pool, Darko
Stosic, Dusan Stosic, Ganesh Venkatesh, Chong
Yu, and Paulius Micikevicius. 2021. Accelerating sparse deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.08378.
NeuralMagic. 2021. Deep sparse: A fast cpu inference
engine.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.
OpenAI blog, 1(8):9.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev,
and Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions
for machine comprehension of text. In EMNLP.
Hassan Sajjad, Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, and
Preslav Nakov. 2020. Poor man’s BERT:
smaller and faster transformer models. CoRR,
abs/2004.03844.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.01108.
Victor Sanh, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander Rush.
2020. Movement pruning: Adaptive sparsity by
ﬁne-tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:20378–20389.
Iyer Shankar, Dandekar Nikhil, and Csernai Kornel.
2017. First quora dataset release: Question pairs.
S. Shankar. 2017. Identifying quora question pairs having the same intent.
Sheng Shen, Zhen Dong, Jiayu Ye, Linjian Ma, Zhewei
Yao, Amir Gholami, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt
Keutzer. 2020. Q-bert: Hessian based ultra low
precision quantization of bert. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 34, pages 8815–8821.
Sidak Pal Singh and Dan Alistarh. 2020. Woodﬁsher:
Efﬁcient second-order approximation for neural network compression. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33.
Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick,
Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared
Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George
Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, et al. 2022. Using

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: Computational Linguistics: | EMNLP | 2020, | pages | Unnamed: 0 | Paul Michel, Omer Levy, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.
Row 1: Computational Linguistics:: 4163–4174. | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Are sixteen heads really better than one? | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: Advances
Row 2: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: in neural information processing systems, 32. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 3: Computational Linguistics:: hoon Kim, Sheng Shen, David Thorsley, Amir Gho- | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 4: Computational Linguistics:: lami, Woosuk Kwon, Joseph | EMNLP: Hassoun, | 2020,: and | pages: Kurt | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Asit Mishra, Jorge Albericio Latorre, Jeff Pool, Darko | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 5: Computational Linguistics:: Keutzer. 2022. Learned token | EMNLP: pruning | 2020,: for | pages: trans- | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Stosic, Dusan Stosic, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: Ganesh Venkatesh, Chong
Row 6: Computational Linguistics:: formers. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Yu, and Paulius Micikevicius. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: 2021. AcceleratRow 7: Computational Linguistics:: Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min- | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: ing sparse deep neural | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: networks. arXiv preprint
Row 8: Computational Linguistics:: ing, KDD ’22, page 784–794. Association for Com- | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: arXiv:2104.08378. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 9: Computational Linguistics:: puting Machinery. | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 10: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: NeuralMagic. 2021. Deep sparse: A fast cpu inference | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 11: Computational Linguistics:: ga Kovaleva, Saurabh Kulshreshtha, | EMNLP: Anna | 2020,: Rogers, | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: engine. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 12: Computational Linguistics:: and Anna Rumshisky. 2021. | EMNLP: BERT busters: Outlier | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 13: Computational Linguistics:: layernorm dimensions that | EMNLP: disrupt BERT. | 2020,: | pages: CoRR, | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 14: Computational Linguistics:: abs/2105.06990. | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: et al. 2019. LanRow 15: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: guage models are unsupervised | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: multitask learners.
Row 16: Computational Linguistics:: rk Kurtz, Justin Kopinsky, Rati Gelashvili, Alexan- | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: OpenAI blog, 1(8):9. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 17: Computational Linguistics:: der Matveev, John Carr, Michael | EMNLP: Goin, | 2020,: William | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 18: Computational Linguistics:: Leiserson, Sage Moore, Bill Nell, | EMNLP: Nir Shavit, | 2020,: | pages: and | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: Konstantin Lopyrev,
Row 19: Computational Linguistics:: Dan Alistarh. 2020. Inducing and exploiting activa- | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: and Percy Liang. 2016. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: Squad: 100,000+ questions
Row 20: Computational Linguistics:: tion sparsity for fast inference on deep neural net- | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: for machine comprehension of text. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: In EMNLP.
Row 21: Computational Linguistics:: works. In Proceedings of | EMNLP: the 37th | 2020,: International | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 22: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Hassan Sajjad, Fahim Dalvi, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: Nadir Durrani, and
Row 23: Computational Linguistics:: Conference on Machine Learning, | EMNLP: volume | 2020,: 119 | pages: of | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 24: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Preslav Nakov. 2020. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: Poor man’s BERT:
Row 25: Computational Linguistics:: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 26: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: smaller and faster transformer | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: models. CoRR,
Row 27: Computational Linguistics:: 5533–5543, Virtual. PMLR. | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 28: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: abs/2004.03844. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 29: Computational Linguistics:: nçois Lagunas, Ella Charlaix, | EMNLP: Victor | 2020,: Sanh, | pages: and | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 30: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: Julien Chaumond, and
Row 31: Computational Linguistics:: Alexander Rush. 2021. Block | EMNLP: pruning | 2020,: for | pages: faster | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 32: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: a distilled version
Row 33: Computational Linguistics:: transformers. In Proceedings | EMNLP: of the | 2020,: 2021 Confer- | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 34: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: arXiv
Row 35: Computational Linguistics:: ence on Empirical Methods | EMNLP: in Natural | 2020,: Language | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 36: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: preprint arXiv:1910.01108. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 37: Computational Linguistics:: Processing, pages 10619–10629, Online and Punta | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 38: Computational Linguistics:: Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Compu- | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Victor Sanh, Thomas Wolf, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: and Alexander Rush.
Row 39: Computational Linguistics:: tational Linguistics. | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: 2020. Movement pruning: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: Adaptive sparsity by
Row 40: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: fine-tuning. Advances | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: in Neural Information ProRow 41: Computational Linguistics:: nn LeCun, John Denker, and Sara Solla. 1989. Opti- | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 42: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: cessing Systems, 33:20378–20389. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 43: Computational Linguistics:: mal brain damage. Advances in neural information | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 44: Computational Linguistics:: processing systems, 2. | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: Iyer Shankar, Dandekar Nikhil, | and Graham Neubig. 2019.: and Csernai Kornel.
Row 45: Computational Linguistics:: | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: 2017. First quora dataset release: Question pairs. | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 46: Computational Linguistics:: entin Lhoest, Albert Villanova | EMNLP: del Moral, | 2020,: Yacine | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
Row 47: Computational Linguistics:: Jernite, Abhishek Thakur, Patrick von Platen, Suraj | EMNLP: | 2020,: | pages: | Unnamed: 0: | Paul Michel, Omer Levy,: S. Shankar. 2017. Identifying quora question pairs hav- | and Graham Neubig. 2019.:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 12]
deepspeed and megatron to train megatron-turing
nlg 530b, a large-scale generative language model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11990.
Sharath Nittur Sridhar and Anthony Sarah. 2020. Undivided attention: Are intermediate layers necessary
for bert? arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.11881.
Zhiqing Sun, Hongkun Yu, Xiaodan Song, Renjie Liu,
Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. 2020a. Mobilebert:
a compact task-agnostic bert for resource-limited devices. In ACL.
Zhiqing Sun, Hongkun Yu, Xiaodan Song, Renjie Liu,
Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. 2020b. Mobilebert:
a compact task-agnostic bert for resource-limited devices. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2158–2170.
Iulia Turc, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. 2019. Well-read students learn better:
The impact of student initialization on knowledge
distillation. ArXiv, abs/1908.08962.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30.
Elena V oita, David Talbot, F. Moiseev, Rico Sennrich,
and Ivan Titov. 2019. Analyzing multi-head selfattention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the
rest can be pruned. In ACL.
Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan
Yang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. Minilm: Deep selfattention distillation for task-agnostic compression
of pre-trained transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:5776–5788.
Liu Weijie, Zhou Peng, Zhao Zhe, Wang Zhiruo, Deng
Haotang, and Ju Qi. 2020. Fastbert: a self-distilling
bert with adaptive inference time. In Proceedings of
ACL 2020.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2020.
Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ji Xin, Raphael Tang, Jaejun Lee, Yaoliang Yu, and
Jimmy J. Lin. 2020. Deebert: Dynamic early exiting for accelerating bert inference. In ACL.
Dongkuan Xu, Ian En-Hsu Yen, Jinxi Zhao, and Zhibin
Xiao. 2021. Rethinking network pruning – under
the pre-train and ﬁne-tune paradigm. In NAACL.
Shixing Yu, Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Zhen Dong,
Sehoon Kim, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt
Keutzer. 2022. Hessian-aware pruning and optimal
neural implant. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 3880–3891.
Oﬁr Zafrir, Guy Boudoukh, Peter Izsak, and Moshe
Wasserblat. 2019. Q8bert: Quantized 8bit bert.
2019 Fifth Workshop on Energy Efﬁcient Machine
Learning and Cognitive Computing - NeurIPS Edition (EMC2-NIPS), pages 36–39.
Oﬁr Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,
and Moshe Wasserblat. 2021. Prune once for all:
Sparse pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.05754.
Qingru Zhang, Simiao Zuo, Chen Liang, Alexander
Bukharin, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Tuo
Zhao. 2022. Platon: Pruning large transformer
models with upper conﬁdence bound of weight importance. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 26809–26823. PMLR.
Wei Zhang, Lu Hou, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xiao
Chen, Xin Jiang, and Qun Liu. 2020. Ternarybert:
Distillation-aware ultra-low bit bert. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.12812.
M. Zhu and Suyog Gupta. 2018. To prune, or not to
prune: exploring the efﬁcacy of pruning for model
compression. ArXiv, abs/1710.01878.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard S. Zemel, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies:
Towards story-like visual explanations by watching movies and reading books. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,
pages 19–27.
A Appendix
A.1 MLPerf Inference benchmark
Following the MLPerf benchmark guidelines on
producing compressed and fast models while
maintaining >99% of the BERTLARGE F1 score on

[TABLE page=12 index=2]
Columns: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all | Unnamed: 0 | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,
Row 1: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: you need. Advances in neural information process- | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: and Moshe Wasserblat. 2021. Prune once for all:
Row 2: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: ing systems, 30. | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Sparse pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint
Row 3: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: arXiv:2111.05754.
Row 4: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: na Voita, David Talbot, F. Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,:
Row 5: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: and Ivan Titov. 2019. Analyzing multi-head self- | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Qingru Zhang, Simiao Zuo, Chen Liang, Alexander
Row 6: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Bukharin, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Tuo
Row 7: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: rest can be pruned. In ACL. | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Zhao. 2022. Platon: Pruning large transformer
Row 8: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: models with upper confidence bound of weight imRow 9: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: nhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: portance. In International Conference on Machine
Row 10: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: Yang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. Minilm: Deep self- | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Learning, pages 26809–26823. PMLR.
Row 11: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: attention distillation for task-agnostic compression | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,:
Row 12: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: of pre-trained transformers. Advances in Neural In- | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Wei Zhang, Lu Hou, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xiao
Row 13: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: formation Processing Systems, 33:5776–5788. | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Chen, Xin Jiang, and Qun Liu. 2020. Ternarybert:
Row 14: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Distillation-aware ultra-low bit bert. arXiv preprint
Row 15: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: Weijie, Zhou Peng, Zhao Zhe, Wang Zhiruo, Deng | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: arXiv:2009.12812.
Row 16: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: Haotang, and Ju Qi. 2020. Fastbert: a self-distilling | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,:
Row 17: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: bert with adaptive inference time. In Proceedings of | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: M. Zhu and Suyog Gupta. 2018. To prune, or not to
Row 18: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: ACL 2020. | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: prune: exploring the efficacy of pruning for model
Row 19: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: compression. ArXiv, abs/1710.01878.
Row 20: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: ina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,:
Row 21: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: 2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen- | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard S. Zemel, Ruslan
Row 22: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: tence understanding through inference. In Proceed- | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
Row 23: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies:
Row 24: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin- | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: Towards story-like visual explanations by watchRow 25: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: ing movies and reading books. 2015 IEEE InterRow 26: Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all: 1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122. Association for | Unnamed: 0: | Ofir Zafrir, Ariel Larey, Guy Boudoukh, Haihao Shen,: national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=12 index=3]
Columns: The impact | of | student | initialization | Unnamed: 0 | on knowledge | Unnamed: 1 | Wasserblat. 2019. | Q8bert: | Quantized | 8bit | bert.
Row 1: The impact: distillation. ArXiv, abs/1908.08962. | of: | student: | initialization: | Unnamed: 0: | on knowledge: | Unnamed: 1: | Wasserblat. 2019.: 2019 Fifth Workshop on Energy Efficient Machine | Q8bert:: | Quantized: | 8bit: | bert.:
Row 2: The impact: | of: | student: | initialization: | Unnamed: 0: | on knowledge: | Unnamed: 1: | Wasserblat. 2019.: Learning and Cognitive Computing - NeurIPS Edi- | Q8bert:: | Quantized: | 8bit: | bert.:
Row 3: The impact: Ashish Vaswani, | of: | student: Noam Shazeer, | initialization: Niki | Unnamed: 0: | on knowledge: Parmar, | Unnamed: 1: Jakob | Wasserblat. 2019.: tion (EMC2-NIPS), pages 36–39. | Q8bert:: | Quantized: | 8bit: | bert.:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 13]
the SQuADv1.1 task, we explore two directions. In
the ﬁrst one, dubbed oBERT-Large, we compound
compress the BERTLARGE model without any
changes to its architecture. Therefore, we apply
4-block downstream pruning to 95% sparsity
followed by the quantization aware training (QAT).
In the second direction we focus on recovering
the BERTLARGE accuracy by compressing an
already compact MobileBERT model, dubbed
oBERT-MobileBERT. More speciﬁcally, we
apply direct layer dropping, leaving only 14
transformer layers out of the original 24, followed
by the 4-block pruning to 50% sparsity and
quantization aware training. We present results in
Table 8, where models were evaluated with the
DeepSparse inference engine, using a server with
two Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8380 (IceLake)
CPUs with 40 cores each, batch-size 128 and
sequence length 384. For more details please see
our ofﬁcial submission athttps://github.com/
neuralmagic/mlperf_inference_results_v2.
1/tree/master/open/NeuralMagic.
A.2 Additional comparisons
Here we reﬂect upon some other methods focused
on efﬁcient inference for LLMs, which are orthogonal to weight pruning. For example, Learned Token Pruning (Kim et al., 2022) tries to adaptively
remove unimportant tokens in input sequences and
provides 2x higher throughput at < 1% accuracy
drop; at the same accuracy drop, our compressed
model is able to achieve 8.4x higher throughput.
DeeBERT (Xin et al., 2020) and FastBERT (Weijie et al., 2020) apply an early-exit technique for
inference speedup. The latter achieves 2-3x faster
inference without performance degradation. However, the method only applies to batch size one.
Nevertheless, in terms of direct comparison, our
compressed models are able to achieve 4x faster
inference on CPUs without accuracy degradation.
Overall, we emphasize the fact that these methods
are complementary to our compression techniques,
so it would be interesting to investigate computational gains by combining such methods.
A.3 Computational costs
In practice, for the 12-layer BERTBASE model with
d = 85M encoder weights and block sizeB = 50,
theO(Bd) memory requirement translates to approximately 17GB, which can be easily kept on
the 24GB RTX 3090 card. While this amount of
memory is available on high-performance GPUs,
it is also straightforward to split theNB×B×B
tensor along the batch-dimensionNB and utilize
additional GPUs or even memory swapping with
CPU. Our implementation updates the inverse Hessian approximation in negligible time, and can run
asynchronously while the next gradient is being
fetched. Computing saliency scores and optimal
weight updates takes only a few seconds.
A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT)
hyper-parameters
Hyper-parameters. The oBERT pruning method
has three tunable hyper-parameters: number of
gradients (m), block size (B), and dampening (λ).
These are supposed to be tuned with respect to
the model and available computational resources.
In all of our runs, across all models and datasets,
we use the same set of hyper-parameters which we
found to work best for theBERTBASE model on the
SQuAD v1.1 dataset. We conjecture that further
tuning for smaller models (3 and 6-layer models)
could improve their results, but for simplicity and
fairness to other methods, we apply the same ones
found for the BERTBASE .
Ablation studies. The procedure to ﬁnd the optimal set of hyper-parameters for a model consists
of a grid search over the possible hyper-parameter
combinations and one-shot pruning runs to various
high sparsity targets to evaluate the quality of the
pruning approximation for each combination. We
found thatm = 1024,B = 50, andλ = 10−7 produce state-of-the-art results for a negligible computational overhead with the BERTBASE model. Frantar et al. (2021) shows that larger block sizes
require more gradients for better approximation.
Given the massive size of the BERTBASE model,
we picked this setup as it was the best performing
one that could still ﬁt on a single 24GB RTX 3090
GPU card. In Figures 3, 4, and 5 we visualize a
fraction of the one-shot pruning ablations with respect to all three hyper-parameters that motivated
us to pick these speciﬁc values.
A.5 Downstream pruning
Teacher preparation. For all downstream pruning runs we make use of the KD from the ﬁnetuned BERTBASE teacher outputs. The teacher
is ﬁne-tuned on the corresponding downstream

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT) | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: by the 4-block pruning to 50% sparsity and | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): hyper-parameters | Unnamed: 0:
Row 2: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: quantization aware training. We present results in | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): Hyper-parameters. The oBERT pruning method | Unnamed: 0:
Row 3: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: Table 8, where models were evaluated with the | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): has three tunable hyper-parameters: number | Unnamed: 0: of
Row 4: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: DeepSparse inference engine, using a server with | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): gradients (m), block size (B), and dampening (λ). | Unnamed: 0:
Row 5: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: two Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8380 (IceLake) | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): These are supposed to be tuned with respect | Unnamed: 0: to
Row 6: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: CPUs with 40 cores each, batch-size 128 and | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): the model and available computational resources. | Unnamed: 0:
Row 7: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: sequence length 384. For more details please see | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): In all of our runs, across all models and datasets, | Unnamed: 0:
Row 8: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: our official submission at https://github.com/ | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): we use the same set of hyper-parameters which we | Unnamed: 0:
Row 9: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: neuralmagic/mlperf_inference_results_v2. | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): found to work best for the BERTBASE model on the | Unnamed: 0:
Row 10: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: 1/tree/master/open/NeuralMagic. | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): SQuAD v1.1 dataset. We conjecture that further | Unnamed: 0:
Row 11: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): tuning for smaller models (3 and 6-layer models) | Unnamed: 0:
Row 12: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: A.2 Additional comparisons | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): | Unnamed: 0:
Row 13: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): could improve their results, but for simplicity and | Unnamed: 0:
Row 14: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: Here we reflect upon some other methods focused | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): fairness to other methods, we apply the same ones | Unnamed: 0:
Row 15: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: on efficient inference for LLMs, which are orthog- | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): found for the BERTBASE . | Unnamed: 0:
Row 16: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: onal to weight pruning. For example, Learned To- | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): Ablation studies. The procedure to find the opti- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 17: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: ken Pruning (Kim et al., 2022) tries to adaptively | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): mal set of hyper-parameters for a model consists | Unnamed: 0:
Row 18: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: remove unimportant tokens in input sequences and | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): of a grid search over the possible hyper-parameter | Unnamed: 0:
Row 19: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: provides 2x higher throughput at < 1% accuracy | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): combinations and one-shot pruning runs to various | Unnamed: 0:
Row 20: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: drop; at the same accuracy drop, our compressed | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): high sparsity targets to evaluate the quality of the | Unnamed: 0:
Row 21: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: model is able to achieve 8.4x higher throughput. | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): pruning approximation for each combination. We | Unnamed: 0:
Row 22: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: DeeBERT (Xin et al., 2020) and FastBERT (Wei- | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): found that m = 1024, B = 50, and λ = 10−7 pro- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 23: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: jie et al., 2020) apply an early-exit technique for | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): duce state-of-the-art results for a negligible compu- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 24: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: inference speedup. The latter achieves 2-3x faster | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): tational overhead with the BERTBASE model. Fran- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 25: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: inference without performance degradation. How- | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): tar et al. (2021) shows that larger block | Unnamed: 0: sizes
Row 26: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: ever, the method only applies to batch size one. | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): require more gradients for better approximation. | Unnamed: 0:
Row 27: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: Nevertheless, in terms of direct comparison, our | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): Given the massive size of the BERTBASE model, | Unnamed: 0:
Row 28: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: compressed models are able to achieve 4x faster | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): we picked this setup as it was the best performing | Unnamed: 0:
Row 29: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: inference on CPUs without accuracy degradation. | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): one that could still fit on a single 24GB RTX 3090 | Unnamed: 0:
Row 30: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: Overall, we emphasize the fact that these methods | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): GPU card. In Figures 3, 4, and 5 we visualize a | Unnamed: 0:
Row 31: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: are complementary to our compression techniques, | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): fraction of the one-shot pruning ablations with re- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 32: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: so it would be interesting to investigate computa- | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): spect to all three hyper-parameters that motivated | Unnamed: 0:
Row 33: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: tional gains by combining such methods. | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): us to pick these specific values. | Unnamed: 0:
Row 34: transformer layers out of the original 24, followed: A.3 Computational costs | A.4 Optimal BERT Surgeon (oBERT): A.5 Downstream pruning | Unnamed: 0:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 14]
Table 8: MLPerf inference results for oBERT compressed BERTLARGE and MobileBERT models.
Model Precision F1 Score
(R=X% recovery) File Size Compression
Ratio
Throughput
(samples/sec) Speedup
BERT-Large
dense baseline FP32 90.87 (R=100%) 1.30 GB 1x 15.49 1x
oBERT-Large INT8 90.21 (R=99.27%) 38.20 MB 34x 230.74 15x
oBERT-MobileBERT INT8 90.32 (R=99.39%) 9.56 MB 136x 928.58 60x
50 60 70
Sparsity (%)
90F1 score
BERTBASE
B = 50
B = 5k
B = 500k
M-FAC
Figure 3: One-shot pruning ablation study with respect
to the block size (B), with m = 1024 andλ = 10 −7,
on the BERT BASE model and the question-answering
SQuAD v1.1 dataset. M-FAC stands for the full inverse Hessian approximation (Frantar et al., 2021).
50 60 70
Sparsity (%)
88F1 score
BERTBASE
m = 128
m = 512
m = 1024
Figure 4: One-shot pruning ablation study with respect
to the number of gradients ( m), with B = 50 and
λ = 10 −7, on the BERT BASE model and the questionanswering SQuAD v1.1 dataset.
50 60 70
Sparsity (%)
88F1 score
BERTBASE
= 10 6
= 10 8
= 10 7
Figure 5: One-shot pruning ablation study with respect
to the dampening (λ), with m = 1024 and B = 50 ,
on the BERT BASE model and the question-answering
SQuAD v1.1 dataset.
task following the default hyper-parameters for
SQuAD2 and GLUE (QQP and MNLI)3.
Pruning setup. In Table 9 we describe in detail all
hyper-parameters for downstream pruning results
presented in Tables 1 and 3. For easier comprehension, we also visualize learning rate schedules in
Figures 6 and 8, and sparsity schedules in Figures
7 and 9.
3-, 6-layer models. We prepare our 3 and 6 layer
models for downstream runs in two stages: layer
dropping and retraining phase. We drop layers
from our upstream teacher model (more details on
it in Appendix A.6). After dropping, we retrain the
remaining layers, following insights from (Turc
et al., 2019), in the same setup used to prepare the
upstream teacher with addition of the KD from it.
A.6 Upstream pruning
Teacher preparation. We prepare a teacher for
upstream pruning by following some insights from
(Liu et al., 2019). More concretely we start with the
2https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/main/
examples/pytorch/question-answering
3https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/main/
examples/pytorch/text-classiﬁcation

[TABLE page=14 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | F1 Score | Unnamed: 2 | Compression | Throughput | Unnamed: 3
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Model | Unnamed: 1: Precision | F1 Score: | Unnamed: 2: File Size | Compression: | Throughput: | Unnamed: 3: Speedup
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | F1 Score: (R=X% recovery) | Unnamed: 2: | Compression: Ratio | Throughput: (samples/sec) | Unnamed: 3:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: BERT-Large | Unnamed: 1: | F1 Score: | Unnamed: 2: | Compression: | Throughput: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: FP32 | F1 Score: 90.87 (R=100%) | Unnamed: 2: 1.30 GB | Compression: 1x | Throughput: 15.49 | Unnamed: 3: 1x
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 15]
10 Epochs 30 Epochs
Batch size 16 for SQuAD,
32 for GLUE
Learning rate (initial, ﬁnal) (8e-5, 3e-5) for SQuAD,
(8e-5, 2e-5) for GLUE
(8e-5, 8e-6) for SQuAD,
(5e-5, 5e-6) for GLUE
Learning rate schedule linear decay with rewinds
Learning rate rewinds one at epoch=8 periodic every 4 epochs,
start at epoch=2
Knowledge Distillation (hardness, temp.) (1.0, 2.0)
Student model
12-layer: bert-base-uncased
6-layer: layer drop + pre-train with KD
3-layer: layer drop + pre-train with KD
Teacher model BERTBASE
Prune start epoch=2
Prune end epoch=8 epoch=26
Pruning frequency 2x per epoch once every 4 epochs
Initial sparsity step
12-layer: 70%
6-layer: 30%
3-layer: 30%
Sparsity distribution global over all layers
oBERT parameters
Number of gradientsm = 1024
Block sizeB = 50
Dampeningλ = 10−7
Table 9: Downstream pruning hyper-parameters used to obtain results presented in Tables 1 and 3.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Epoch
8Learning rate
1e 5
SQuAD
GLUE
Figure 6: Visualized learning rate schedule for 10epoch downstream runs.
bert-base-uncased4 model, adopt pre-training on
two datasets (BookCorpus5 & English Wikipedia6)
with focus on the masked language modeling task
(MLM) for 10-epochs with batch size 256 and
learning rate linearly decaying to zero from the
initial value of 1e-4.
4https://huggingface.co/bert-base-uncased
5https://huggingface.co/datasets/bookcorpus
6https://huggingface.co/datasets/wikipedia
0 2 4 6 8 10
Epoch
90Sparsity (%)
Figure 7: Visualized sparsity schedule for 10-epoch
downstream runs with initial sparsity of 70% and target
sparsity of 90%, following the cubic interpolation (Zhu
and Gupta, 2018).
Pruning setup. In Table 10 we describe in detail our upstream pruning recipe. As can be
noticed, our upstream pruning recipe is just a
downscaled version of our 30-epoch downstreampruning recipe to 3-epochs.

[TABLE page=15 index=1]
Columns: 8 | Unnamed: 0 | 90
Row 1: 8: | Unnamed: 0: | 90: 80.0
Row 2: 8: 7.0 | Unnamed: 0: | 90: 70.0
Row 3: 8: 6.0 | Unnamed: 0: | 90:
Row 4: 8: 5.0 | Unnamed: 0: | 90:
Row 5: 8: 4.0 | Unnamed: 0: | 90:
Row 6: 8: 3.0 | Unnamed: 0: SQuAD | 90:
Row 7: 8: | Unnamed: 0: GLUE | 90:
Row 8: 8: 2.0 | Unnamed: 0: | 90: 0.0
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 16]
3 Epochs
Datasets BookCorpus & English Wikipedia
Batch size 256
Initial learning rate 5e-4
Learning rate schedule linear decay with rewinds
Learning rate rewinds periodic every 0.5 epochs
Max sequence length 512
Weight decay 0.01
Knowledge Distillation
(hardness, temperature) (1.0, 5.5)
Student model prepared upstream teacher
Teacher model prepared upstream teacher
Pruning frequency 4x per epoch
Table 10: Upstream pruning hyper-parameters.
8 Epochs
Initial learning rate 1.5e-4
Learning rate schedule linear decay to 1.5e-6
Batch size 16 for SQuAD,
32 for GLUE
Knowledge Distillation
(hardness, temperature) (1.0, 5.5)
Teacher model BERTBASE
Table 11: Sparse-transfer learning hyper-parameters
used to ﬁne-tune upstream-pruned models at downstream tasks. These hyper-parameters are used to obtain results presented in Table 2.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Epoch
8Learning rate
1e 5
SQuAD
GLUE
Figure 8: Visualized learning rate schedule for 30epoch downstream runs.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Epoch
90Sparsity (%)
Figure 9: Visualized sparsity schedule for 30-epoch
downstream runs with initial sparsity of 70% and target
sparsity of 90%, following the cubic interpolation (Zhu
and Gupta, 2018).
A.7 Downstream quantization
We perform QAT on top of dense and 4-block
pruned models on SQuAD v1.1 as shown in Table
3. We quantize to 8 bits the embedding matrices,
linear modules of all encoder units which includes
matrices in their attention and feed forward layers,
and the linear module of the output layer. Weights
that were pruned are kept constant (zero) during
quantization (sparsity mask preserved). Non-linear
operations within the Softmax, LayerNorm and
GeLU are not quantized. For each dense and 4block pruned model in Table 3, we perform a total
of ten epochs training where the quantization observers are active for the ﬁrst ﬁve and the remaining
is ﬁne-tuning. We do hyper-parameter search over
the learning rates of 1e-4, 8e-5, 5e-5, 3e-5 and the
distillation hardness of 0.9 and 1.0. We then pick
the model with the best F1 score.

[PAGE 17]
A.8 Additional performance metrics
Due to the space constraints, in the paper we report
F1 score for SQuAD v1.1, matched accuracy for
MNLI, and accuracy for QQP dataset. As all of our
hyper-parameters for MNLI and QQP are exactly
the same, we refer to these two datasets as GLUE.
In Table 12 we report the additional metrics too:
exact match (EM) for SQuAD v1.1, mismatched
accuracy for MNLI, and F1 score for QQP dataset.
Tables 15 and 16 present standard deviations of the
corresponding results in Tables 1, 2 and 12. Finally,
Table 14 presents the exact-match metric for the
corresponding results in Table 3.
Task BERT
BASE Sparsity Soft
MvP
oBERT
(ours)
oBERT
(ours)
Epochs 10 Epochs 30 Epochs
SQuAD
EM 81.22
80%
90%
97%
76.60
72.70
80.76
76.14
82.08
81.12
78.11
MNLI
mm-acc 85.06
80%
90%
97%
81.80
80.10
83.58
80.67
84.91
84.35
82.01
QQP
F1 88.00
80%
90%
97%
86.80
85.50
87.69
87.05
88.63
88.30
87.66
Table 12: Additional evaluation metrics for results presented in Table 1.
Task BERT
BASE Sparsity Prune
OFA
oBERT
(ours)
SQuAD
EM 81.42 90%
97%
79.83
81.43
76.90
MNLI
mm-acc 85.06 90%
97%
82.43
83.78
81.13
QQP
F1 88.00 90%
97%
87.72
87.81
86.97
Table 13: Additional evaluation metrics for results presented in Table 2.
A.9 Inference speedups and compression
ratios of compressed models
Details on the results shown in Figure 2 are drawn
from Table 17. As shown in the results, not all
compound compressed models yield improvements
in inference or compression relative to retained
model performance but those that do allow for
massive improvements.
Layers Sparsity Unstructured 4-block +QAT
0%
80%
90%
82.71
82.08
81.12
82.71
81.46
80.14
81.99
80.57
78.84
0%
80%
90%
81.17
81.15
79.16
81.17
79.55
77.65
80.85
78.27
76.56
0%
80%
90%
76.62
75.62
73.61
76.62
74.07
71.36
76.06
72.70
70.00
Table 14: Additional evaluation metric (exact-match)
for results presented in Table 3.
Task Sparsity oBERT
(ours)
Epochs 30 Epochs
SQuAD
F1, EM
80%
90%
97%
0.11, 0.03
0.13, 0.13
0.11, 0.17
MNLI
m, mm
80%
90%
97%
0.14, 0.13
0.05, 0.04
0.35, 0.22
QQP
acc, F1
80%
90%
97%
0.08, 0.08
0.04, 0.06
0.05, 0.08
Table 15: Standard deviations for results presented in
Tables 1 and 12.
Task Sparsity oBERT
(ours)
SQuAD
F1, EM
90%
97%
0.13, 0.13
0.03, 0.14
MNLI
m, mm
90%
97%
0.08, 0.24
0.17, 0.35
QQP
acc, F1
90%
97%
0.06, 0.07
0.09, 0.18
Table 16: Standard deviations for results presented in
Table 2 and 13.
A.10 Responsible NLP Research Reproducibility Checklist
In addition to many items from the “Reproducibility Checklist” which are already carefully addressed throughout the paper and Appendix sections, here we provide the remaining details to
facilitate reproducibility of our results.
A.10.1 Scientiﬁc Artifacts
Datasets. Our experiments use existing and well
established benchmarks for pre-training and ﬁne17

[TABLE page=17 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | BERT | Unnamed: 1 | Soft oBERT | oBERT | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Task | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: Sparsity | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Epochs | Unnamed: 4: 30 Epochs
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: BASE | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: MvP (ours) | oBERT: (ours) | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 80% | Unnamed: 4: 0.11, 0.03
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: Epochs | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: 10 Epochs | oBERT: 30 Epochs | Unnamed: 2: SQuAD | Unnamed: 3: 90% | Unnamed: 4: 0.13, 0.13
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: F1, EM | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: 0.11, 0.1780% | Soft oBERT: - - | oBERT: 82.08 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 97% | Unnamed: 4:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: SQuAD | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: 81.22 | Unnamed: 1: 90% | Soft oBERT: 76.60 80.76 | oBERT: 81.12 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: EM | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 80% | Unnamed: 4: 0.14, 0.13
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: 97% | Soft oBERT: 72.70 76.14 | oBERT: 78.11 | Unnamed: 2: MNLI | Unnamed: 3: 90% | Unnamed: 4: 0.05, 0.04
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: m, mm | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: 0.35, 0.2280% | Soft oBERT: - - | oBERT: 84.91 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 97% | Unnamed: 4:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: MNLI | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: 85.06 | Unnamed: 1: 90% | Soft oBERT: 81.80 83.58 | oBERT: 84.35 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: mm-acc | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 80% | Unnamed: 4: 0.08, 0.08
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: 97% | Soft oBERT: 80.10 80.67 | oBERT: 82.01 | Unnamed: 2: QQP | Unnamed: 3: 90% | Unnamed: 4: 0.04, 0.06
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: acc, F1 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: 0.05, 0.0880% | Soft oBERT: - - | oBERT: 88.63 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 97% | Unnamed: 4:
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: QQP | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: 88.00 | Unnamed: 1: 90% | Soft oBERT: 86.80 87.69 | oBERT: 88.30 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: F1 | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: | Soft oBERT: | oBERT: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: | BERT: | Unnamed: 1: 97% | Soft oBERT: 85.50 87.05 | oBERT: 87.66 | Unnamed: 2: Table 15: Standard deviations for results presented in | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=17 index=2]
Columns: A.8 Additional performance metrics | Unnamed: 0 | Layers | Sparsity | Unstructured | 4-block | +QAT
Row 1: A.8 Additional performance metrics: Due to the space constraints, in the paper we report | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: | Sparsity: 0% | Unstructured: 82.71 | 4-block: 82.71 | +QAT: 81.99
Row 2: A.8 Additional performance metrics: | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: 12.0 | Sparsity: 80% | Unstructured: 82.08 | 4-block: 81.46 | +QAT: 80.57
Row 3: A.8 Additional performance metrics: F1 score for SQuAD v1.1, matched accuracy for | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: | Sparsity: 90% | Unstructured: 81.12 | 4-block: 80.14 | +QAT: 78.84
Row 4: A.8 Additional performance metrics: MNLI, and accuracy for QQP dataset. As all of our | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: | Sparsity: | Unstructured: | 4-block: | +QAT:
Row 5: A.8 Additional performance metrics: | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: | Sparsity: 0% | Unstructured: 81.17 | 4-block: 81.17 | +QAT: 80.85
Row 6: A.8 Additional performance metrics: hyper-parameters for MNLI and QQP are exactly | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: 6.0 | Sparsity: 80% | Unstructured: 81.15 | 4-block: 79.55 | +QAT: 78.27
Row 7: A.8 Additional performance metrics: the same, we refer to these two datasets as GLUE. | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: | Sparsity: 90% | Unstructured: 79.16 | 4-block: 77.65 | +QAT: 76.56
Row 8: A.8 Additional performance metrics: In Table 12 we report the additional metrics too: | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: | Sparsity: 0% | Unstructured: 76.62 | 4-block: 76.62 | +QAT: 76.06
Row 9: A.8 Additional performance metrics: exact match (EM) for SQuAD v1.1, mismatched | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: 3.0 | Sparsity: 80% | Unstructured: 75.62 | 4-block: 74.07 | +QAT: 72.7
Row 10: A.8 Additional performance metrics: | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: | Sparsity: 90% | Unstructured: 73.61 | 4-block: 71.36 | +QAT: 70.0
Row 11: A.8 Additional performance metrics: accuracy for MNLI, and F1 score for QQP dataset. | Unnamed: 0: | Layers: | Sparsity: | Unstructured: | 4-block: | +QAT:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 18]
Layers Sparsity
(%)
Compression
Method
F1 score F1 recall
(%)
Throughput
(items per sec.)
Speedup
DeepSparse
Model size
(gzip MB)
Compression
Ratio (w.r.t. gzip)
12 0 none 88.54 100.00 65.81 1.00 384.7 1.00
12 80 unstructured 89.04 100.56 222.66 3.38 173.1 2.22
12 90 unstructured 88.31 99.74 292.40 4.44 140.1 2.75
12 80 4-block+QAT 87.89 99.26 552.22 8.39 37.8 10.18
6 80 unstructured 88.20 99.62 419.68 6.38 128.3 3.00
6 90 unstructured 86.78 98.01 663.02 10.07 111.8 3.44
6 80 4-block+QAT 86.10 97.24 989.54 15.04 26.2 14.70
3 80 unstructured 84.08 94.96 737.62 11.21 105.9 3.63
3 90 unstructured 82.50 93.18 974.00 14.80 97.7 3.94
3 80 4-block+QAT 82.04 92.66 1892.27 28.75 20.3 18.92
Table 17: Compression effects on model size and inference speed, evaluated at batch size 32 with sequence length
128 on SQuAD v1.1 dataset. Evaluated at the c5.12xlarge AWS instance.
tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without
any additional forms of modiﬁcations. Given that
we did not modify any of the datasets, we did not
inspect for personal, sensitive, or offensive content, nor did we perform any kind of anonymization. For pre-training, we make use of the Toronto
Book Corpus (TBC) (Zhu et al., 2015) 7 and the
wikipedia.20200501.en (Foundation) 8. For ﬁnetuning we make use of SQuAD v1.1 (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016) 9, Quora Duplicate Question Dataset
(QQP) (Shankar, 2017) 10, and Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference (MNLI) (Williams et al.,
2018) 11 datasets. All these datasets are publicly available via HuggingFace datasets repository (Lhoest et al., 2021). The terms of usage and
further details on each dataset can be found in their
respective repositories.
Models. The model used as a starting point for all
of our experiments is BERTBASE , publicly available via HuggingFace Hub 12. All other models
presented in this paper will be released in openlyavailable repositories along with their compression
recipes, training metrics and hyper-parameters.
A.10.2 Dataset Statistics
Dataset statistics are detailed in Table 18.
A.10.3 Computational Experiments
Upstream. All upstream runs are in general computationally expensive due to the large batch sizes
7https://huggingface.co/datasets/bookcorpus
8https://huggingface.co/datasets/wikipedia
9https://huggingface.co/datasets/squad
10https://huggingface.co/datasets/glue
11https://huggingface.co/datasets/glue
12https://huggingface.co/bert-base-uncased
Dataset Train Eval
SQuAD (examples) 87599 10570
MNLI (examples) 392702 19628
QQP (examples) 363,846 40,430
Wikipedia (words) 6078422 TBC (words) 74004228 Table 18: Statistics for training and evaluation datasets
and huge datasets. In our experiments we make
use of 4x A100 40GB NVIDIA GPUs. In this
conﬁguration, a single training epoch takes approximately 6 hours. Since the cost of such a large compute instance is high, these experiments were only
run with a single seed and without major hyperparameter exploration.
Downstream. Our downstream experiments make
use of various different GPU cards that were at
out disposal: 16GB V100, 11GB RTX 2080 Ti,
and 24GB RTX 3090. Each training epoch takes
approximately 30 minutes, and as a result the 30
epoch runs take approximately 15 hours. For these
experiments, we report mean results of three runs
with different random seeds.
DeepSparse inference. We pair our compressed
models with DeepSparse (NeuralMagic, 2021) a
publicly-available sparsity-aware CPU inference
engine. This CPU runtime can leverage both
structured and unstructured sparsity, and quantization to deliver high performance on commodity
CPUs. We ran DeepSparse on a 24-core Intel AWS
c5.12xlarge server with 24 cores, 96 vCPUs, 192
GB of RAM and an A VX-512 compatible instruction set. All models are exported using the standard

[TABLE page=18 index=1]
Columns: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without | Dataset | Train | Eval
Row 1: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without: any additional forms of modifications. Given that | Dataset: SQuAD (examples) | Train: 87599 | Eval: 10570
Row 2: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without: we did not modify any of the datasets, we did not | Dataset: | Train: | Eval:
Row 3: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without: | Dataset: MNLI (examples) | Train: 392702 | Eval: 19628
Row 4: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without: inspect for personal, sensitive, or offensive con- | Dataset: | Train: | Eval:
Row 5: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without: | Dataset: QQP (examples) | Train: 363,846 | Eval: 40,430
Row 6: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without: tent, nor did we perform any kind of anonymiza- | Dataset: | Train: | Eval:
Row 7: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without: -tion. For pre-training, we make use of the Toronto | Dataset: Wikipedia (words) | Train: 6078422 | Eval:
Row 8: tuning of LLMs. Each dataset was used without: Book Corpus (TBC) (Zhu et al., 2015) 7 and the | Dataset: TBC (words) | Train: 74004228 | Eval: -
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=18 index=2]
Columns: Layers | Sparsity | Compression | F1 score | F1 recall | Throughput | Speedup | Model size | Compression.1
Row 1: Layers: | Sparsity: (%) | Compression: Method | F1 score: | F1 recall: (%) | Throughput: (items per sec.) | Speedup: DeepSparse | Model size: (gzip MB) | Compression.1: Ratio (w.r.t. gzip)
Row 2: Layers: 12.0 | Sparsity: 0 | Compression: none | F1 score: 88.54 | F1 recall: 100.00 | Throughput: 65.81 | Speedup: 1.00 | Model size: 384.7 | Compression.1: 1.00
Row 3: Layers: 12.0 | Sparsity: 80 | Compression: unstructured | F1 score: 89.04 | F1 recall: 100.56 | Throughput: 222.66 | Speedup: 3.38 | Model size: 173.1 | Compression.1: 2.22
Row 4: Layers: 12.0 | Sparsity: 90 | Compression: unstructured | F1 score: 88.31 | F1 recall: 99.74 | Throughput: 292.40 | Speedup: 4.44 | Model size: 140.1 | Compression.1: 2.75
Row 5: Layers: 12.0 | Sparsity: 80 | Compression: 4-block+QAT | F1 score: 87.89 | F1 recall: 99.26 | Throughput: 552.22 | Speedup: 8.39 | Model size: 37.8 | Compression.1: 10.18
Row 6: Layers: 6.0 | Sparsity: 80 | Compression: unstructured | F1 score: 88.2 | F1 recall: 99.62 | Throughput: 419.68 | Speedup: 6.38 | Model size: 128.3 | Compression.1: 3.00
Row 7: Layers: 6.0 | Sparsity: 90 | Compression: unstructured | F1 score: 86.78 | F1 recall: 98.01 | Throughput: 663.02 | Speedup: 10.07 | Model size: 111.8 | Compression.1: 3.44
Row 8: Layers: 6.0 | Sparsity: 80 | Compression: 4-block+QAT | F1 score: 86.1 | F1 recall: 97.24 | Throughput: 989.54 | Speedup: 15.04 | Model size: 26.2 | Compression.1: 14.70
Row 9: Layers: 3.0 | Sparsity: 80 | Compression: unstructured | F1 score: 84.08 | F1 recall: 94.96 | Throughput: 737.62 | Speedup: 11.21 | Model size: 105.9 | Compression.1: 3.63
Row 10: Layers: 3.0 | Sparsity: 90 | Compression: unstructured | F1 score: 82.5 | F1 recall: 93.18 | Throughput: 974.00 | Speedup: 14.80 | Model size: 97.7 | Compression.1: 3.94
Row 11: Layers: 3.0 | Sparsity: 80 | Compression: 4-block+QAT | F1 score: 82.04 | F1 recall: 92.66 | Throughput: 1892.27 | Speedup: 28.75 | Model size: 20.3 | Compression.1: 18.92
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 19]
ONNX13 format.
A.10.4 Computational Packages
Our experiments build on publicly available libraries to ensure ease of reproduction and extensibility. All of our implementations, training and
evaluation code are built on top of HuggingFace’s
Transformers 14 and Datasets 15 libraries, NeuralMagic’s SparseML 16 library for model compression, and their DeepSparse 17 engine for efﬁcient
inference on commodity CPUs.
13https://onnx.ai/
14https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
15https://github.com/huggingface/datasets
16https://github.com/neuralmagic/sparseml
17https://github.com/neuralmagic/deepsparse