[PAGE 1]
GPT-RE: In-context Learning for Relation Extraction
using Large Language Models
Zhen Wan 1 Fei Cheng 1 Zhuoyuan Mao 1
Qianying Liu1 Haiyue Song1 Jiwei Li2 Sadao Kurohashi1
1 Kyoto University, Japan
2 Zhejiang University, China
{zhenwan, zhuoyuanmao, ying, song}@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
{feicheng, kuro}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
{jiwei_li}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
In spite of the potential for ground-breaking
achievements offered by large language models
(LLMs) (e.g., GPT-3) via in-context learning
(ICL), they still lag significantly behind fullysupervised baselines (e.g., fine-tuned BERT)
in relation extraction (RE). This is due to the
two major shortcomings of ICL for RE: (1) low
relevance regarding entity and relation in existing sentence-level demonstration retrieval approaches for ICL; and (2) the lack of explaining
input-label mappings of demonstrations leading to poor ICL effectiveness.
In this paper, we propose GPT-RE to successfully address the aforementioned issues by
(1) incorporating task-aware representations
in demonstration retrieval; and (2) enriching
the demonstrations with gold label-induced reasoning logic. We evaluate GPT-RE on four
widely-used RE datasets and observe that GPTRE achieves improvements over not only existing GPT-3 baselines, but also fully-supervised
baselines as in Figure 1. Specifically, GPT-RE
achieves SOTA performances on the Semeval
and SciERC datasets, and competitive performances on the TACRED and ACE05 datasets.
Additionally, a critical issue of LLMs revealed
by previous work, the strong inclination to
wrongly classify NULL examples into other predefined labels, is substantially alleviated by our
method. We show an empirical analysis.1
1 Introduction
The emergence of large language models (LLMs)
such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020; Thoppilan et al.,
2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Rae et al., 2021;
Hoffmann et al., 2022) represents a significant advancement in natural language processing (NLP).
Instead of following a pretraining-and-finetuning
pipeline (Devlin et al., 2019; Beltagy et al., 2019;
Raffel et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2019; Zhuang et al.,
2021), which finetunes a pre-trained model on
1https://github.com/YukinoWan/GPT-RE
70.04
79.94
91.989.9Semeval
32.4933.45
72.1469.72TACRED
Fine-tuning Baseline (PURE)GPT-RandomGPT-SentGPT-RE (ours)
Figure 1: Micro F1 performances on two RE datasets.
Previous GPT baselines (GPT-Random: randomly selected demonstrations and GPT-Sent: sentence-level
demonstration retrieval) largely underperform finetuning baseline PURE while our GPT-RE substantially
outperforms all baselines.
a task-specific dataset in a fully-supervised manner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as incontext learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020; Min
et al., 2022a) which formulates an NLP task under
the paradigm of language generation and makes
predictions by learning from a few demonstrations. Under the framework of ICL, LLMs achieve
remarkable performance rivaling previous fullysupervised methods even with only a limited number of demonstrations provided in various tasks
such as solving math problems, commonsense reasoning, text classification, fact retrieval, natural
language inference, and semantic parsing (Brown
et al., 2020; Min et al., 2022b; Zhao et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2022b; Shin et al., 2021).
Despite the overall promising performance of
LLMs, the utilization of ICL for relation extraction
(RE) is still suboptimal. RE is the central task for
knowledge retrieval requiring a deep understanding
of natural language, which seeks to identify a predefined relation between a specific entity pair mentioned in the input sentence or NULL if no relation
is found. Given a test input, ICL for RE prompts
the input of LLMs with the task instruction, a few
demonstrations retrieved from the training data,
arXiv:2305.02105v3 [cs.CL] 9 Dec 2023

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: soning logic. | We evaluate GPT-RE on four | Unnamed: 0 | ner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as inRow 1: soning logic.: widely-used RE datasets and observe that GPT- | We evaluate GPT-RE on four: | Unnamed: 0: | ner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as in-:
Row 2: soning logic.: | We evaluate GPT-RE on four: | Unnamed: 0: | ner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as in-: context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020; Min
Row 3: soning logic.: RE achieves improvements over not only exist- | We evaluate GPT-RE on four: | Unnamed: 0: | ner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as in-:
Row 4: soning logic.: | We evaluate GPT-RE on four: | Unnamed: 0: | ner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as in-: et al., 2022a) which formulates an NLP task under
Row 5: soning logic.: ing GPT-3 baselines, but also fully-supervised | We evaluate GPT-RE on four: | Unnamed: 0: | ner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as in-:
Row 6: soning logic.: baselines as in Figure 1. Specifically, GPT-RE | We evaluate GPT-RE on four: | Unnamed: 0: | ner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as in-: the paradigm of language generation and makes
Row 7: soning logic.: achieves SOTA performances on the Semeval | We evaluate GPT-RE on four: | Unnamed: 0: | ner, LLMs employ a new paradigm known as in-: predictions by learning from a few demonstra-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
Microsoft is a technology company located in the U.S., founded in 1975 by Bill Gatesand Paul AllenRE TrainingData
Microsoft is a famouscomputer technologycompany in the U.S. whose history started in 1975
RetrievalTestInput
Few-shot DemonstrationsRelation Triplet: (Microsoft, Bill Gates, founded by)
Relation Triplet: (Microsoft, the U.S., located in)
Figure 2: Retrieval without considering the task-aware
triplet results in noisy demonstrations.
and the test input itself. Then LLMs generate the
corresponding relation. Recent research (Gutiérrez et al., 2022) has sought to apply GPT-3 ICL to
biomedical RE, but the results are relatively negative and suggest that GPT-3 ICL still significantly
underperforms fine-tuned models.
The reasons that cause the pitfall of GPT-3 ICL
in RE are two folds: (1) The low relevance regarding entity and relation in the retrieved demonstrations for ICL. Demonstrations are selected randomly or via k-nearest neighbor ( kNN) search
based on sentence embedding (Liu et al., 2022b;
Gutiérrez et al., 2022). Regrettably, kNN-retrieval
based on sentence embedding is more concerned
with the relevance of the overall sentence semantics and not as much with the specific entities and
relations it contains, which leads to low-quality
demonstrations. As shown in Figure 2, the test input retrieves a semantically similar sentence but is
not desired in terms of entities and relations.
(2) The lack of explaining input-label mappings
in demonstrations leads to poor ICL effectiveness:
A vanilla form of ICL lists all demonstrations as
input-label pairs without any explanations. This
may mislead LLMs to learn shallow clues from
surface words, while a relation can be presented
in diverse forms due to language complexity. Especially when ICL has a maximal input length,
optimizing the learning efficiency of each single
demonstration becomes extremely important.
To this end, we propose GPT-RE for the RE
task. GPT-RE employs two strategies to resolve
the issues above: (1) task-aware retrieval and (2)
gold label-induced reasoning. For (1) task-aware
retrieval, its core is to use representations that deliberately encode and emphasize entity and relation
information rather than sentence embedding for
kNN search. We achieve this by two different retrieval approaches: (a) entity-prompted sentence
embedding; (b) fine-tuned relation representation,
which naturally places emphasis on entities and
NULLCEIAPPNULLCEIAPP
True
Predicted
BERT Fine-tuning
NULLCEIAPP
1.00.80.60.40.20.0NULLCEIAPP
True
Predicted
GPT-3 In-context Learning
Figure 3: Confusion matrix on Semeval dataset with
three selected relation labels. The NULL examples are
overpredicted to other relations by GPT-3. CE: CauseEffect, IA: Instrument-Agency, PP: Product-Producer.
relations. Both methods contain more RE-specific
information than sentence semantics, thus effectively addressing the problem of low relevance.
For (2) gold label-induced reasoning, we propose to inject the reasoning logic into the demonstration to provide more evidence to align an input and the label, a strategy akin to the Chain-ofThought (CoT) research (Wei et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022). But different
from previous work, we allow LLMs to elicit the
reasoning process to explain not only why a given
sentence should be classified under a particular label but also why a NULL example should not be
assigned to any of the pre-defined categories. This
process significantly improves the ability of LLMs
to align the relations with diverse expression forms.
Recent work reveals another crucial problem
named “overpredicting” as shown in Figure 3: we
observe that LLMs have the strong inclination to
wrongly classify NULL examples into other predefined labels . A similar phenomenon has also
been observed in other tasks such as NER (Gutiérrez et al., 2022; Blevins et al., 2022). In this paper,
we show that this issue can be alleviated if the representations for retrieval can be supervised with the
whole set of NULL in the training data.
We evaluate our proposed method on three popular general domain RE datasets: Semeval 2010 task
8, TACRED and ACE05, and one scientific domain
dataset SciERC. We observe that GPT-RE achieves
improvements over not only existing GPT-3 baselines, but also fully-supervised baselines. Specifically, GPT-RE achieves SOTA performances on the
Semeval and SciERC datasets, and competitive performances on the TACRED and ACE05 datasets.

[PAGE 3]
ℎ["#$]⊕ℎ[&$']
Context: My 8 year-olddaughtercame up withan extremely goodidea.Relation: ?
Training Set
Tokens: [𝐶𝐿𝑆]My 8 year-old𝑂𝐵𝐽daughter[/𝑂𝐵𝐽]came up withan extremely good [𝑆𝑈𝐵]idea[/𝑆𝑈𝐵].Reconstructed context: The relation between “idea” and “daughter” in the context:My 8 year-olddaughtercame up with an extremely good idea.
SimCSEFine-tuned RE Modelℎ()*+)*,)
Context: ideasfor continuous development also emerged from the students' collaborative efforts.Relation: PRODUCT AND PRODUCER
I will predict the relation between two entities given the context.The pre-defined relations areCAUSE AND EFFECT,COMPONENT AND WHOLE, …I will output NULLif the relation does not belong to them.
Task Description
ICL Demonstrations (𝒌-shot)
Context: My 8 year-olddaughtercame up withan extremely goodidea.Given the context, the relation between ideaand daughterisTest Input
Test OutputPRODUCT AND PRODUCER
Gold Label-induced Reasoning (Sec. 2.5)
Context: ideasfor continuous development also emerged from the students' collaborative efforts.Given the context, the relation between ideasand studentsis PRODUCT AND PRODUCER.Reason: The phrase "collaborative efforts" suggests that students are working together to create something;The word “emerged” …
Task-aware Demonstration Retreval (Sec. 2.4) Prompt Construction (Sec. 2.3)
Test Input
𝑘NN Retrieval
Retrieved Demonstrations
Figure 4: An illustration of GPT-RE. Given a test input, we first leverage two different task-aware retrieval methods
to search for highly relevant demonstrations from the training set, and then incorporate the gold label-induced
reasoning for each demonstration. Above contents will then be included in the prompt construction to make the
prediction.
2 Methodology: GPT-RE
2.1 Task Definition
Let C denote the input context and esub ∈ C ,
eobj ∈ C denote the pair of subject and object entity.
Given a set of pre-defined relation classes R, relation extraction aims to predict the relation y ∈ R
between the pair of entities ( esub, eobj) within the
context C, or if there is no pre-defined relation between them, predict y = NULL .
2.2 Overview
We will first introduce the prompt construction
to formalize RE as a language generation task
in Sec. 2.3. Then to improve the ICL framework for RE, we will introduce two modules: (1)
task-aware demonstration retrieval to select higherquality demonstrations (Sec. 2.4); (2) gold labelinduced reasoning to enrich each demonstration
with explanations (Sec. 2.5). In Figure 4, we show
the concrete workflow of processing a test input.
2.3 Prompt Construction
We construct a prompt for each given test example,
which is fed to the GPT-3 model. Each prompt
consists of the following components:
Instructions I We provide a succinct overview
of the RE task description and the set of pre-defined
classes R. The model is explicitly asked to output the relation, which belongs to the pre-defined
classes. Otherwise, the model will output NULL .
ICL Demonstrations D We first leverage a taskaware retriever to acquire a k-shot demonstration
set, then enrich each demonstration (xi, yi) with
the gold label-induced reasoning ri to build a new
set of (xi, yi, ri) as D.
Test Input xtest Similar to the demonstrations,
we offer the test input xtest, and GPT-3 is expected
to generate the corresponding relation ytest.
In summary, GPT-RE can be formulated as:
p (ytest ∈ R ∪ {NULL }|I, D, xtest) (1)
2.4 Task-aware Demonstration Retrieval
Since ICL demonstrations closer to the test sample
in the embedding space result in more consistent
and robust performance (Liu et al., 2022b). Recent work (Gutiérrez et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b)
employs the kNN to retrieve the most similar examples in the training set as the few-shot demonstrations for each test input. As kNN relies on the
choice of the embedding space to encode both test
input and examples in the training set, they propose
to obtain sentence embedding using pre-trained
language models, or other improved sentence embedding.
However, using sentence embedding for kNN
retrieval has a severe drawback: relation extraction focuses on pair-wise entities, which diverge
from the semantic meaning of the entire sentence,
leading to an ambiguous retrieval using sentence
embedding. In this study, we propose two novel

[PAGE 4]
methods to provide more robust representations for
better retrieval quality: (1) a naive entity-prompted
sentence embedding in Sec. 2.4.1; (2) an advanced
fine-tuned relation representation in Sec. 2.4.2.
2.4.1 Entity-Prompted Sentence Embedding
Given the discrepancy between sentence embedding and relation extraction, the original context is
insufficient for demonstration retrieval. Considering the importance of entity information in RE, we
propose reconstructing the context by incorporating entity pair information. For example, given the
context “He has a sister Lisa,” the reconstructed
context with the entity prompted will be “The relation between ‘He’ and ‘Lisa’ in the context: He
has a sister Lisa.” This approach preserves both
the semantic meaning of the sentence and the entity pair-centered information during retrieval. In
the paper, we employ the latest robust model SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021) for computing sentence
embedding-based similarity.
2.4.2 Fine-tuned Relation Representation
Compared to prompt entity information into context sentences, a more straightforward solution is to
extract the relation representation from a fine-tuned
RE model for retrieving demonstrations.
Current BERT-based fine-tuning methods for
RE (Baldini Soares et al., 2019; Zhong and Chen,
2021; Wan et al., 2022) attempts to capture both
the context information and the entity information
by adding extra marker tokens to highlight the subject and object entities and their types. Specifically,
given an example: “He has a sister Lisa.”, the input tokens are “[CLS] [SUB_PER] He [/SUB_PER]
has a sister [OBJ_PER] Lisa [/OBJ_PER] . [SEP] ”
where “PER” is the entity type if provided. Denote the n-th hidden representation of the BERT
encoder as hn. Assuming i and j are the indices
of two beginning entity markers [SUB_PER] and
[OBJ_PER] , we define the relation representation as
Rel = hi ⊕ hj where ⊕ stands for concatenation
of representations in the first dimension. Subsequently, this representation is fed into a feedforward network for predicting the relation probability
p(y ∈ R ∪ {NULL } | Rel).
The entity markers have explicitly encoded subject and object entities and the relation representation Rel is naturally enriched with the entity information. We believe this approach can potentially compensate for the limitations of GPT-3 in
RE. While GPT-3 ICL has a constraint of limited
Context: ideasfor continuous development also emerged from the students' collaborative efforts.Given the context, the relation between ideasand studentsis PRODUCT AND PRODUCER.
ICL Demostration
What are the clues that lead to the relation between “ideas” and “students” to be PRODUCT AND PRODUCER in the sentence “ideasfor continuous development also emerged from the students' collaborative efforts.”?
Query
It is because: The phrase "collaborative efforts" suggests that students are working together to create or produce something; The use of the word "emerged" implies that the ideas are a result or product of the students' efforts. Therefore, the relation between students and ideas is PRODUCT AND PRODUCER.
Reason
Figure 5: An illustration of adding reasoning.
Dataset # Relation # Train # Dev # Test (# Subset) NULL (%)Semeval 9 6,507 1,493 2,717 (2,717) 17.40%TACRED 41 68,124 22,631 15,509 (1,600) 79.40%SciERC 7 16,872 2,033 4,088 (4,088) 90.16%ACE05 6 121,368 27,597 24,420 (2,442) 95.60%
Table 1: Statistics of datasets.
demonstrations, the fine-tuning process is unbundled and can be done on the whole train data. It
has two subsequent merits. First, the relation representations are directly fine-tuned to fit the RE task,
which could significantly boost the overall retrieval
quality. Second, the overpredicting NULL issue
will be substantially alleviated because the similar
NULL demonstrated can be accurately recognized
by the fine-tuned model.
2.5 Gold Label-induced Reasoning
Recent CoT work has reported significant progress
in the commonsense and numerical reasoning tasks
by automatically eliciting the reasoning steps for
solving a question. While in the RE task, two
entities can possibly hold multiple relations, e.g.,
“Joe Biden” can be either the president of or lives
in “U.S.”. The reasoning generation could be out
of focus if it lacks interaction with the gold label.
In this section, we propose to let GPT-3 induce
the reasoning logic for each demonstration by the
corresponding gold relation label. As shown in
Figure 5, given a selected demonstration, we first
generate a query prompt “What are the clues that
lead to the relation between [entity1] and [entity2]
to be [relation] in the sentence [context]?” based
on the demonstration and subsequently ask GPT-3
to generate clues “It is because: ...” on the labeled
relation between the pair of entities in the context.
Finally, we augment the demonstration by incorporating the generated clues induced by GPT-3.

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: methods to provide more robust representations for | ICL Demostration
Row 1: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: Context: ideas for continuous development also emerged from the
Row 2: methods to provide more robust representations for: better retrieval quality: (1) a naive entity-prompted | ICL Demostration: students' collaborative efforts. Given the context, the relation between
Row 3: methods to provide more robust representations for: sentence embedding in Sec. 2.4.1; (2) an advanced | ICL Demostration: ideas and students is PRODUCT AND PRODUCER.
Row 4: methods to provide more robust representations for: fine-tuned relation representation in Sec. 2.4.2. | ICL Demostration:
Row 5: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: Query
Row 6: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: What are the clues that lead to the relation between “ideas” and
Row 7: methods to provide more robust representations for: 2.4.1 Entity-Prompted Sentence Embedding | ICL Demostration: “students” to be PRODUCT AND PRODUCER in the sentence “ideas
Row 8: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: for continuous development also emerged from the students'
Row 9: methods to provide more robust representations for: Given the discrepancy between sentence embed- | ICL Demostration: collaborative efforts.”?
Row 10: methods to provide more robust representations for: ding and relation extraction, the original context is | ICL Demostration:
Row 11: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: Reason
Row 12: methods to provide more robust representations for: insufficient for demonstration retrieval. Consider- | ICL Demostration: It is because: The phrase "collaborative efforts" suggests that
Row 13: methods to provide more robust representations for: ing the importance of entity information in RE, we | ICL Demostration: students are working together to create or produce something; The
Row 14: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: use of the word "emerged" implies that the ideas are a result or
Row 15: methods to provide more robust representations for: propose reconstructing the context by incorporat- | ICL Demostration: product of the students' efforts. Therefore, the relation between
Row 16: methods to provide more robust representations for: ing entity pair information. For example, given the | ICL Demostration: students and ideas is PRODUCT AND PRODUCER.
Row 17: methods to provide more robust representations for: context “He has a sister Lisa,” the reconstructed | ICL Demostration:
Row 18: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: Figure 5: An illustration of adding reasoning.
Row 19: methods to provide more robust representations for: context with the entity prompted will be “The re- | ICL Demostration:
Row 20: methods to provide more robust representations for: lation between ‘He’ and ‘Lisa’ in the context: He | ICL Demostration:
Row 21: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: Dataset # Relation # Train # Dev # Test (# Subset) NULL (%)
Row 22: methods to provide more robust representations for: has a sister Lisa.” This approach preserves both | ICL Demostration: Semeval 9 6,507 1,493 2,717 (2,717) 17.40%
Row 23: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: TACRED 41 68,124 22,631 15,509 (1,600) 79.40%
Row 24: methods to provide more robust representations for: the semantic meaning of the sentence and the en- | ICL Demostration: SciERC 7 16,872 2,033 4,088 (4,088) 90.16%
Row 25: methods to provide more robust representations for: tity pair-centered information during retrieval. In | ICL Demostration: ACE05 6 121,368 27,597 24,420 (2,442) 95.60%
Row 26: methods to provide more robust representations for: the paper, we employ the latest robust model Sim- | ICL Demostration:
Row 27: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: Table 1: Statistics of datasets.
Row 28: methods to provide more robust representations for: CSE (Gao et al., 2021) for computing sentence | ICL Demostration:
Row 29: methods to provide more robust representations for: embedding-based similarity. | ICL Demostration:
Row 30: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: demonstrations, the fine-tuning process is unbunRow 31: methods to provide more robust representations for: 2.4.2 Fine-tuned Relation Representation | ICL Demostration:
Row 32: methods to provide more robust representations for: | ICL Demostration: dled and can be done on the whole train data. It
Row 33: methods to provide more robust representations for: Compared to prompt entity information into con- | ICL Demostration: has two subsequent merits. First, the relation repreRow 34: methods to provide more robust representations for: text sentences, a more straightforward solution is to | ICL Demostration: sentations are directly fine-tuned to fit the RE task,
Row 35: methods to provide more robust representations for: extract the relation representation from a fine-tuned | ICL Demostration: which could significantly boost the overall retrieval
Row 36: methods to provide more robust representations for: RE model for retrieving demonstrations. | ICL Demostration: quality. Second, the overpredicting NULL issue
Row 37: methods to provide more robust representations for: Current BERT-based fine-tuning methods for | ICL Demostration: will be substantially alleviated because the similar
Row 38: methods to provide more robust representations for: RE (Baldini Soares et al., 2019; Zhong and Chen, | ICL Demostration: NULL demonstrated can be accurately recognized
Row 39: methods to provide more robust representations for: 2021; Wan et al., 2022) attempts to capture both | ICL Demostration: by the fine-tuned model.
Row 40: methods to provide more robust representations for: the context information and the entity information | ICL Demostration:
Row 41: methods to provide more robust representations for: by adding extra marker tokens to highlight the sub- | ICL Demostration: 2.5 Gold Label-induced Reasoning
Row 42: methods to provide more robust representations for: ject and object entities and their types. Specifically, | ICL Demostration: Recent CoT work has reported significant progress
Row 43: methods to provide more robust representations for: given an example: “He has a sister Lisa.”, the in- | ICL Demostration: in the commonsense and numerical reasoning tasks
Row 44: methods to provide more robust representations for: put tokens are “[CLS] [SUB_PER] He [/SUB_PER] | ICL Demostration: by automatically eliciting the reasoning steps for
Row 45: methods to provide more robust representations for: has a sister [OBJ_PER] Lisa [/OBJ_PER]. [SEP]” | ICL Demostration: solving a question. While in the RE task, two
Row 46: methods to provide more robust representations for: where “PER” is the entity type if provided. De- | ICL Demostration: entities can possibly hold multiple relations, e.g.,
Row 47: methods to provide more robust representations for: note the n-th hidden representation of the BERT | ICL Demostration: “Joe Biden” can be either the president of or lives
Row 48: methods to provide more robust representations for: encoder as hn. Assuming i and j are the indices | ICL Demostration: in “U.S.”. The reasoning generation could be out
Row 49: methods to provide more robust representations for: of two beginning entity markers [SUB_PER] and | ICL Demostration: of focus if it lacks interaction with the gold label.
Row 50: methods to provide more robust representations for: [OBJ_PER], we define the relation representation as | ICL Demostration: In this section, we propose to let GPT-3 induce
Row 51: methods to provide more robust representations for: Rel = hi ⊕ hj where ⊕ stands for concatenation | ICL Demostration: the reasoning logic for each demonstration by the
Row 52: methods to provide more robust representations for: of representations in the first dimension. Subse- | ICL Demostration: corresponding gold relation label. As shown in
Row 53: methods to provide more robust representations for: quently, this representation is fed into a feedfor- | ICL Demostration: Figure 5, given a selected demonstration, we first
Row 54: methods to provide more robust representations for: ward network for predicting the relation probability | ICL Demostration: generate a query prompt “What are the clues that
Row 55: methods to provide more robust representations for: p(y ∈ R ∪ {NULL} | Rel). | ICL Demostration: lead to the relation between [entity1] and [entity2]
Row 56: methods to provide more robust representations for: The entity markers have explicitly encoded sub- | ICL Demostration: to be [relation] in the sentence [context]?” based
Row 57: methods to provide more robust representations for: ject and object entities and the relation represen- | ICL Demostration: on the demonstration and subsequently ask GPT-3
Row 58: methods to provide more robust representations for: tation Rel is naturally enriched with the entity in- | ICL Demostration: to generate clues “It is because: ...” on the labeled
Row 59: methods to provide more robust representations for: formation. We believe this approach can poten- | ICL Demostration: relation between the pair of entities in the context.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
Methods Retriever Semeval TACRED SciERC ACE05
GPT-3 Baselines (Best k-shot)
GPT-Random - 70.04 (30) 32.49 (15) 17.92 (25) 9.04 (25)
GPT-Sent SimCSE 79.94 (30) 33.45 (15) 20.96 (25) 6.31 (25)
Ours (Best k-shot)
GPT-RE_SimCSE SimCSE 81.02 (30) 37.44 (15) 26.46 (25) 8.67 (25)
GPT-RE_SimCSE* SimCSE 77.49 (15) 31.58 (10) - -
+ Reasoning SimCSE 79.88 (15) 33.18 (10) - GPT-RE_FT PURE 91.90 (25) 72.14 (15) 69.00 (30) 68.73 (25)
GPT-RE_FT* PURE 91.11 (15) 70.38 (10) - -
+ Reasoning PURE 91.82 (15) 70.97 (10) - Fine-tuned RE Baselines
Cohen et al. (2020) 91.90 - - Wang et al. (2022a) - ♣76.80 - PURE (Zhong and Chen, 2021) 89.90 69.72 68.45 70.09
Table 2: Main Results on four RE datasets. All results are given by Micro-F1. * denotes the same k-shot for the
comparison with + Reasoning. Due to the costly GPT-3 expense, we conducted Reasoning experiments on the two
relatively smaller datasets Semeval and TACRED.♣ denotes that this performance is not comparable as it evaluates
on the entire test set. The underline denotes the results outperforming the fine-tuning baseline PURE.
3 Experiment Setup
3.1 Datasets
We evaluate on three popular general domain RE
datasets and one scientific domain dataset. Due
to the cost of running the model in the API with
GPT-3, in our main results, we sample a subset
(See Appendix C) from the original test set for
two datasets: ACE05 and TACRED as shown in
Table 1.
Semeval 2010 task 8 Hendrickx et al. (2010) focuses on semantic relations between pairs of nominals collected from general domain resources.
TACRED Zhang et al. (2017) is a large-scale
relation extraction dataset with 106,264 examples
built over newswire and web text.
SciERC Luan et al. (2018) collects AI paper
abstracts and annotated relations, especially for
scientific knowledge graph construction.
ACE05 contains the entity, relation, and event
annotations collected from domains including
newswire, broadcast, discussion forums, etc.
3.2 Baseline Methods
GPT-3 baselines For GPT-3 baselines and our
methods, we select “ text-davinci-003” with
maximal 4,097 input tokens and use the identical
prompt construction (Sec. 2.3) via OpenAI API.
We implement two categories of GPT-3 baselines:
(1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting
few-shot demonstrations from the training data for
each test input, we add extra constraints to make the
label distribution of selected demonstrations more
uniform. Our preliminary experiments suggest that
this is a stronger baseline than the vanilla random.
(2) GPT-Sent Previous work attempts various sentence embedding in retrieval. In this work, our implementation adopted SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021),
which has been demonstrated to be the state-of-theart method for sentence similarity tasks.
Fine-tuned RE Models In our experiment, we
choose PURE (Zhong and Chen, 2021), an entity marker-based fine-tuned model mentioned in
Sec. 2.4.2 to obtain the representations for retrieval.
Meanwhile, PURE performs as a directly comparable baseline. We also compare with corresponding
SOTA fine-tuned baselines on Semeval Cohen et al.
(2020) (reformulate RE as the question answering
task) and TACRED Wang et al. (2022a) (extra pretraining to capture RE structure) datasets.
All implementation details are in Appendix A.

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: Methods | Retriever | Semeval TACRED | Unnamed: 0 | SciERC | ACE05
Row 1: Methods: | Retriever: | Semeval TACRED: GPT-3 Baselines (Best k-shot) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: | ACE05:
Row 2: Methods: GPT-Random | Retriever: - | Semeval TACRED: 70.04 (30) 32.49 (15) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: 17.92 (25) | ACE05: 9.04 (25)
Row 3: Methods: GPT-Sent | Retriever: SimCSE | Semeval TACRED: 79.94 (30) 33.45 (15) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: 20.96 (25) | ACE05: 6.31 (25)
Row 4: Methods: | Retriever: | Semeval TACRED: Ours (Best k-shot) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: | ACE05:
Row 5: Methods: GPT-RE_SimCSE | Retriever: SimCSE | Semeval TACRED: 81.02 (30) 37.44 (15) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: 26.46 (25) | ACE05: 8.67 (25)
Row 6: Methods: GPT-RE_SimCSE* | Retriever: SimCSE | Semeval TACRED: 77.49 (15) 31.58 (10) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: - | ACE05: Row 7: Methods: + Reasoning | Retriever: SimCSE | Semeval TACRED: 79.88 (15) 33.18 (10) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: - | ACE05: Row 8: Methods: GPT-RE_FT | Retriever: PURE | Semeval TACRED: 91.90 (25) 72.14 (15) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: 69.00 (30) | ACE05: 68.73 (25)
Row 9: Methods: GPT-RE_FT* | Retriever: PURE | Semeval TACRED: 91.11 (15) 70.38 (10) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: - | ACE05: Row 10: Methods: + Reasoning | Retriever: PURE | Semeval TACRED: 91.82 (15) 70.97 (10) | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: - | ACE05: Row 11: Methods: | Retriever: | Semeval TACRED: Fine-tuned RE Baselines | Unnamed: 0: | SciERC: | ACE05:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=5 index=2]
Columns: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting
Row 1: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: datasets and one scientific domain dataset. Due | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: few-shot demonstrations from the training data for
Row 2: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: to the cost of running the model in the API with | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: each test input, we add extra constraints to make the
Row 3: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: GPT-3, in our main results, we sample a subset | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: label distribution of selected demonstrations more
Row 4: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: (See Appendix C) from the original test set for | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: uniform. Our preliminary experiments suggest that
Row 5: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: two datasets: ACE05 and TACRED as shown in | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: this is a stronger baseline than the vanilla random.
Row 6: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: Table 1. | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting:
Row 7: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: (2) GPT-Sent Previous work attempts various senRow 8: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: Semeval 2010 task 8 Hendrickx et al. (2010) fo- | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: tence embedding in retrieval. In this work, our imRow 9: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: cuses on semantic relations between pairs of nomi- | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: plementation adopted SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021),
Row 10: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: nals collected from general domain resources. | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: which has been demonstrated to be the state-of-theRow 11: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: art method for sentence similarity tasks.
Row 12: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: TACRED Zhang et al. (2017) is a large-scale | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting:
Row 13: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: relation extraction dataset with 106,264 examples | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting:
Row 14: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: built over newswire and web text. | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting:
Row 15: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: SciERC Luan et al. (2018) collects AI paper | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: Fine-tuned RE Models In our experiment, we
Row 16: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: abstracts and annotated relations, especially for | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: choose PURE (Zhong and Chen, 2021), an enRow 17: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: scientific knowledge graph construction. | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: tity marker-based fine-tuned model mentioned in
Row 18: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: Sec. 2.4.2 to obtain the representations for retrieval.
Row 19: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: ACE05 contains the entity, relation, and event | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: Meanwhile, PURE performs as a directly comparaRow 20: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: annotations collected from domains including | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: ble baseline. We also compare with corresponding
Row 21: We evaluate on three popular general domain RE: newswire, broadcast, discussion forums, etc. | (1) GPT-Random Instead of randomly selecting: SOTA fine-tuned baselines on Semeval Cohen et al.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
(a) The comparison on retrieval modules
(b) Reasoning with fewer demonstrations.
Figure 6: Ablation study on the retrieval and reasoning components on Semeval. We sampled a subset
from the test data with 300 examples. We show the ‘w/o
reasoning’ results withk = 30 for comparison.
4 Experimental Results
4.1 Main Results
We compare our main experiment results with previous methods in Table 2. GPT-RE_SimCSE denotes our entity-prompted sentence embedding for
retrieval and GPT-RE_FT denotes our fine-tuned
relation representation for retrieval. From the table,
we can observe that: (1) bothGPT-RE_SimCSE and
GPT-RE_FT outperform the retrieval-based GPTSent, indicating that it is necessary to inject the taskspecific information into sentence embedding for
selecting proper demonstrations; (2) GPT-RE_FT
succeeds to outperform the fine-tuning baseline
PURE on three datasets by +2.00, +2.42, +0.55
Micro-F1. It suggests that GPT-3 has the potential to beat fine-tuning when the retriever has prior
task knowledge. GPT-RE_FT eventually achieves
SOTA results on Semeval and SciERC. (3) reasoning module improves GPT-RE_SimCSE by around
2% Micro-F1, indicating that gold label-induced
reasoning successfully enriches the knowledge
Figure 7: Low-resource Scenario on Semeval . We
limit the percentage of training data for both fine-tuning
and retrieval in GPT-RE.
of demonstrations. Meanwhile, the high-quality
demonstrations obtained by GPT-RE_FT offset the
effort of enriching reasoning into demonstrations,
which shows relatively trivial improvements. Since
reasoning aims at enriching demonstrations, this
feature potentially works better with fewer demonstrations, as shown in Section 4.3.
4.2 Ablation Study on Task-aware Retrieval
We first implement the ablation experiments of the
retrieval component with the setting of increasing
k-shot demonstrations (Figure 6a). We find that:
(1) compared to GPT-Random, all the retrievalbased models have higher F1 scores and large gradients of the performance curves. It means that
GPT-3 can learn from high-quality demonstrations
more effectively; (2) after adding entity information to the SimCSE retrieval, GPT-RE_SimCSE
achieves better performance throughout allK shots,
indicating that task-aware sentence embedding can
capture the feature of RE and provide more proper
demonstrations; (3) finally, the fine-tuned relation
representation retriever GPT-RE_FT significantly
outperforms all retrieval-based methods and beats
the fine-tuning baseline when k > 15. Note that
even with k = 5 demonstrations, GPT-RE_FT still
works better than GPT-RE_SimCSE with k = 30
(80.30 − →83.43(+3.13)), which indicates that the
quality of demonstrations shows much more important than the number of demonstrations.
4.3 Ablation Study on Reasoning Enhancing
We then check the influence of our proposed
reasoning-enhanced demonstration, as shown in
Figure 6b. Due to the limited amount of input tokens of GPT-3, we have to set the k ≤ 15 for the

[PAGE 7]
(a) General domain with 17.4% NULL examples
(b) Scientific domain with 90.16% NULL examples
Figure 8: Analysis on the effects of NULL examples. w/o NULL refers to the classification setting that NULL
examples are excluded from the train and test data. w/ NULL refers to the original extraction setting. We use the full
test set for the evaluation.
tokens of reasoning, leading to a trade-off between
adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.
From the result, we find that: (1) with reasoningenhanced demonstrations, GPT-3 always achieves
better scores across all the k-shot settings of both
GPT-RE_SimCSE and GPT-RE_FT, indicating that
the reasoning induced from ground truth relation
labels can effectively unlock the reasoning ability
of GPT-3 and improve the ICL with a deeper understanding of demonstrations. Specifically, for GPTRE_FT, the performance improvement becomes
less significant when more demonstrations are provided, which is feasible as with more high-quality
demonstrations available, GPT-3 can already learn
the internal reasoning behind each demonstration;
(2) since the reasoning enhancement works better
with fewer demonstrations, we expect this method
can be an effective solution to low-shot relation
extraction (Han et al., 2018; Geng et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2022a), which aims at recognizing novel relations with very few or no examples, and we leave
this for future work.
4.4 Low-resource Scenario
We conduct the experiment for observing the lowresource performance in the general domain Semeval task. As shown in Figure 7, we observe
that: (1) all the GPT-3 based results work better than fine-tuning in when the training examples
are less than # 650 (10%). It indicates that in the
general domain RE, GPT-3 benefits from its abundant prior knowledge to understand the relations;
(2) GPT-RE_SimCSE starts to show a substantial
difference to GPT-Sent after the training size surpasses 30%. We believe fewer training candidates
could limit the effects of retrieval; (3) GPT-RE_FT
achieves an upper bound performance in all settings, even when the fine-tuned model shows poor
performance with hundreds of training data (from
#100 to # 400). This emphasizes the impressive
effectiveness of fine-tuned relation representations
for capturing higher-quality demonstrations. The
observation in the low-resource setting is very different from Gutiérrez et al. (2022). We assume
the difference could be caused by the domain and
NULL proportion of the task.
5 Analysis
5.1 The Issue of “Overpredicting”
To analyze the influence of NULL class, we compare the effectiveness of each method for alleviating this issue on two datasets: general domain
Semeval with 17.4% NULL examples and scientific
domain SciERC with 90.16% NULL examples. As
shown in Figure 8, (1) by comparing the performance on Semeval and SciERC, a larger percentage
of NULL examples results in more significant performance drop showing the negative influence of
overpredicting NULL examples; (2) by comparing
w/o NULL and w/ NULL , our GPT-RE_FT shows
the most robustness to the influence of NULL examples, indicating that the RE fine-tuned representations in retrieval can release the overpredicting
issue of GPT-3 by providing higher-quality demonstrations; (3) however, even with task-aware representations, all GPT-3 methods still underperform
the fine-tuning baseline on NULL examples, this is
due to the confusing definition of NULL , in many
cases, there is a certain relation between entities
in the context, but out of the distribution of pre-

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations. | achieves an upper bound performance in all setRow 1: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: From the result, we find that: (1) with reasoning- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: tings, even when the fine-tuned model shows poor
Row 2: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: enhanced demonstrations, GPT-3 always achieves | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: performance with hundreds of training data (from
Row 3: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: better scores across all the k-shot settings of both | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: #100 to #400). This emphasizes the impressive
Row 4: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: GPT-RE_SimCSE and GPT-RE_FT, indicating that | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: effectiveness of fine-tuned relation representations
Row 5: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: the reasoning induced from ground truth relation | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: for capturing higher-quality demonstrations. The
Row 6: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: labels can effectively unlock the reasoning ability | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: observation in the low-resource setting is very difRow 7: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: of GPT-3 and improve the ICL with a deeper under- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: ferent from Gutiérrez et al. (2022). We assume
Row 8: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: standing of demonstrations. Specifically, for GPT- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: the difference could be caused by the domain and
Row 9: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: RE_FT, the performance improvement becomes | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: NULL proportion of the task.
Row 10: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: less significant when more demonstrations are pro- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-:
Row 11: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: vided, which is feasible as with more high-quality | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: 5 Analysis
Row 12: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: demonstrations available, GPT-3 can already learn | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-:
Row 13: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: 5.1 The Issue of “Overpredicting”
Row 14: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: the internal reasoning behind each demonstration; | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-:
Row 15: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: (2) since the reasoning enhancement works better | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: To analyze the influence of NULL class, we comRow 16: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: with fewer demonstrations, we expect this method | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: pare the effectiveness of each method for alleviRow 17: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: can be an effective solution to low-shot relation | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: ating this issue on two datasets: general domain
Row 18: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: extraction (Han et al., 2018; Geng et al., 2020; Liu | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: Semeval with 17.4% NULL examples and scientific
Row 19: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: et al., 2022a), which aims at recognizing novel re- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: domain SciERC with 90.16% NULL examples. As
Row 20: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: lations with very few or no examples, and we leave | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: shown in Figure 8, (1) by comparing the perforRow 21: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: this for future work. | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: mance on Semeval and SciERC, a larger percentage
Row 22: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: of NULL examples results in more significant perRow 23: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: formance drop showing the negative influence of
Row 24: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: 4.4 Low-resource Scenario | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-:
Row 25: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: overpredicting NULL examples; (2) by comparing
Row 26: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: We conduct the experiment for observing the low- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: w/o NULL and w/ NULL, our GPT-RE_FT shows
Row 27: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: resource performance in the general domain Se- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: the most robustness to the influence of NULL exRow 28: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: meval task. As shown in Figure 7, we observe | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: amples, indicating that the RE fine-tuned represenRow 29: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: that: (1) all the GPT-3 based results work bet- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: tations in retrieval can release the overpredicting
Row 30: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: ter than fine-tuning in when the training examples | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: issue of GPT-3 by providing higher-quality demonRow 31: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: are less than # 650 (10%). It indicates that in the | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: strations; (3) however, even with task-aware repreRow 32: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: general domain RE, GPT-3 benefits from its abun- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: sentations, all GPT-3 methods still underperform
Row 33: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: dant prior knowledge to understand the relations; | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: the fine-tuning baseline on NULL examples, this is
Row 34: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: (2) GPT-RE_SimCSE starts to show a substantial | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: due to the confusing definition of NULL, in many
Row 35: adding reasoning and adding more demonstrations.: difference to GPT-Sent after the training size sur- | achieves an upper bound performance in all set-: cases, there is a certain relation between entities
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
Context: among the contents of the vesselwere a set of carpenter 's tools, several large storage jars , ceramic utensils , rope ……Given the context, the relation between tools and vesselis CONTENT AND CONTAINER.
GPT-Sent Demonstration
Context: to preserve its catchof fish, each boat loads between 2000 and 3000 kilos of ice before it goes out to sea .Given the context, the relation between catchand fishis [NULL]
Test Input
Context: local fisherman heated some of their catchcooked over coals in a scuttle.Given the context, the relation between catchand scuttle is CONTENT AND CONTAINER.
GPT-RE_SimCSE Demonstration
Context: septembernormally marks the arrival of the earliest runof fishinto lake tributaries , and peak runs occur in october.Given the context, the relation between runand fishis NULL.
GPT-RE_FT Demonstration
RetrievalGPT-SentGPT-RE_SimCSEGPT-RE_FTGPT-3 OutputCONTENT AND CONTAINERPRODUCT AND PRODUCERNULL
Figure 9: A case study of demonstration quality on
Semeval. [NULL ] is the gold label here.
defined classes. In these cases, GPT-3 tends to
overpredict as the relation information may be covered in its prior knowledge. We think this ability
of GPT-3 can be useful in more open fields, such
as open RE (Banko and Etzioni, 2008) which has
no pre-defined relation classes.
5.2 Case Study of Demonstration Quality
We select one typical test example to better illustrate the amendment of our task-aware demonstration retrieval. As shown in Figure 9, given the
NULL Example, we show the most similar demonstration in retrieval based on three methods. The
GPT-Sent retrieved demonstration focuses on the
semantic meaning of “CONTENT AND CONTAINER” which is shared in the test context, but
not revealed in the target entity pair. This mismatch
confirms the problem of lacking entity information
in retrieval. Instead, GPT-RE_SimCSE retrieves a
much more relevant demonstration that shows the
same semantic relation between “catch” and “fish”
but still faces a minor mismatch as the gold label
is between “catch” and “scuttle.” Finally, GPTRE_FT demonstration shares a similar structure
with the test input regarding the pair of entities,
which is the key clue for predicting the relation
between entities. This result shows a level-bylevel enhancement with more entity information
provided in retrieval. We also show some other
case examples in Appendix B.
6 Related Work
In-context Learning Recent work shows that
ICL of GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) can perform
numerous tasks when provided a few examples in a
natural language prompt. Existing work focuses on
various aspects to effectively utilize the advantages
of GPT-3, from prompt design (Perez et al., 2021)
for proper input to coherence calibration (Malkin
et al., 2022) for tackling the diverse generated output. Another research path locates in the demonstration part, including ordered prompts (Lu et al.,
2022) and retrieval-based demonstrations (Rubin
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b; Shin et al., 2021).
To the best of our knowledge, there is no previous work exploring the potential of GPT-3 on
general domain RE tasks. A recent work attempts
to leverage GPT-3 in biomedical information extraction (NER and RE), and reveals issues of ICL
that may be detrimental to IE tasks in general. Our
work succeeds in overcoming these issues to some
extent and confirms the potential of GPT-3 in both
general and the scientific domain RE.
Retrieval-based Demonstrations Several studies have demonstrated that dynamically selecting
few-shot demonstrations for each test example, instead of utilizing a fixed set, leads to significant
improvement in GPT-3 ICL (Liu et al., 2022b;
Shin et al., 2021; Rubin et al., 2022). They also
show that nearest neighbor in-context examples
yield much better results than the farthest ones.
This leads to the significance of better retrieval
modules for demonstrations. Existing attempts rely
on sentence embedding in retrieval, including the
sentence encoders of PLMs such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Zhuang et al., 2021)
KATE (Liu et al., 2022b) , SimCSE (Gao et al.,
2021), Sentence-BERT (Reimers and Gurevych,
2019; Wolf et al., 2020). Unlike these sentence
embeddings, we propose to fine-tune PLMs on our
target RE tasks to produce more task-specific and
robust representations for retrieval.
7 Conclusions
This work explores the potential of GPT-3 ICL
on RE for bridging the performance gap to the
fine-tuning baselines via two strategies: (1) taskaware demonstration retrieval emphasizes entity
and relation information for improving the accuracy of searching demonstrations; (2) gold labelinduced reasoning enriches the reasoning evidence

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: Retrieval GPT-Sent | GPT-RE_SimCSE | Unnamed: 0 | GPT-RE_FT | et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b; Shin et al., 2021).
Row 1: Retrieval GPT-Sent: PRODUCT ANDGPT-3 Output CONTENT AND | GPT-RE_SimCSE: | Unnamed: 0: | GPT-RE_FT: NULL | et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b; Shin et al., 2021).: To the best of our knowledge, there is no preRow 2: Retrieval GPT-Sent: CONTAINER | GPT-RE_SimCSE: PRODUCER | Unnamed: 0: | GPT-RE_FT: | et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b; Shin et al., 2021).:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
of each demonstration. To the best of our knowledge, GPT-RE is the first GPT-3 ICL research that
significantly outperforms the fine-tuning baseline
on three datasets and achieves SOTA on Semeval
and SciERC. We implement detailed studies to explore how GPT-3 overcomes the difficulties such
as NULL example influence.
Limitations
Despite the overall positive results, GPT-RE still
faces two shortcomings: (1) the issue of overpredicting has been significantly alleviated but not
completely solved, and the NULL recall still lags
behind full-supervised baselines, especially on the
datasets containing a large proportion of NULL examples such as ACE05 (“95.60%”); (2) Though
the task-aware retriever optimizes the representations of PLMs such as SimCSE and BERT, it is
widely considered that LLMs can generate more robust representations than small PLMs. Future work
can replace representations generated by smaller
PLMs with GPT-3 itself. However, due to the access limitation to the representations of GPT-3, we
can nearly confirm this proposal up to now.
References
Livio Baldini Soares, Nicholas FitzGerald, Jeffrey Ling,
and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2019. Matching the blanks:
Distributional similarity for relation learning. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2895–
2905, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Michele Banko and Oren Etzioni. 2008. The tradeoffs
between open and traditional relation extraction. In
Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 28–36, Columbus, Ohio. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciBERT: A pretrained language model for scientific text.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3615–
3620, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Terra Blevins, Hila Gonen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022.
Prompting language models for linguistic structure.
CoRR, abs/2211.07830.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens
Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi,
Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek
Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben
Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob
Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin,
Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat,
Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia,
Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny
Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim,
Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi,
David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira,
Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee,
Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark
Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy
Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov,
and Noah Fiedel. 2022. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. CoRR, abs/2204.02311.
Amir D. N. Cohen, Shachar Rosenman, and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Relation extraction as two-way spanprediction. CoRR, abs/2010.04829.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, V olume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. 2021.
SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of sentence embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 6894–6910, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

[TABLE page=9 index=1]
Columns: dicting has | been | significantly | alleviated | but | not | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Row 1: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Language models are few-shot learners. In AdRow 2: dicting has: completely solved, and the NULL recall still lags | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 3: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
Row 4: dicting has: behind full-supervised baselines, especially on the | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Row 5: dicting has: datasets containing a large proportion of NULL ex- | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Inc.
Row 6: dicting has: amples such as ACE05 (“95.60%”); | been: | significantly: | alleviated: (2) Though | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 7: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Row 8: dicting has: the task-aware retriever optimizes the representa- | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Row 9: dicting has: tions of PLMs such as SimCSE and BERT, it is | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Row 10: dicting has: widely considered that LLMs can generate more ro- | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi,
Row 11: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek
Row 12: dicting has: bust representations than small PLMs. Future work | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 13: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, VinRow 14: dicting has: can replace representations generated by smaller | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: odkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben
Row 15: dicting has: PLMs with GPT-3 itself. However, due to the ac- | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob
Row 16: dicting has: cess limitation to the representations of GPT-3, we | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin,
Row 17: dicting has: Sanjay Ghemawat,can nearly confirm this proposal up to now. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya,
Row 18: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia,
Row 19: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny
Row 20: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim,
Row 21: dicting has: References | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi,
Row 22: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, AnRow 23: dicting has: Livio Baldini Soares, Nicholas FitzGerald, Jeffrey Ling, | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 24: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: drew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana PilRow 25: dicting has: and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2019. Matching the blanks: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 26: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: lai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira,
Row 27: dicting has: Distributional similarity for relation learning. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: In Pro- | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 28: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee,
Row 29: dicting has: ceedings of | been: the 57th Annual Meeting of | significantly: | alleviated: the Asso- | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 30: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark
Row 31: dicting has: ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 2895– | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 32: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy
Row 33: dicting has: 2905, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 34: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov,
Row 35: dicting has: Linguistics. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 36: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: and Noah Fiedel. 2022. Palm: Scaling language modRow 37: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: eling with pathways. CoRR, abs/2204.02311.
Row 38: dicting has: Michele Banko and Oren Etzioni. 2008. The tradeoffs | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 39: dicting has: between open and traditional relation extraction. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: In | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Amir D. N. Cohen, Shachar Rosenman, and Yoav GoldRow 40: dicting has: Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 28–36, Colum- | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: berg. 2020. Relation extraction as two-way spanRow 41: dicting has: bus, Ohio. Association for Computational Linguis- | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: prediction. CoRR, abs/2010.04829.
Row 42: dicting has: tics. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.:
Row 43: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Row 44: dicting has: Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: SciB- | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
Row 45: dicting has: ERT: A pretrained language model for scientific text. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: deep bidirectional transformers for language underRow 46: dicting has: In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
Row 47: dicting has: Methods in Natural Language Processing and the | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: the North American Chapter of the Association for
Row 48: dicting has: 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan- | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Computational Linguistics: Human Language TechRow 49: dicting has: guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3615– | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
Row 50: dicting has: 3620, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa- | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Row 51: dicting has: tional Linguistics. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Computational Linguistics.
Row 52: dicting has: Terra Blevins, Hila Gonen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. 2021.
Row 53: dicting has: Prompting language models for linguistic structure. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of sentence emRow 54: dicting has: CoRR, abs/2211.07830. | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: beddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
Row 55: dicting has: | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: on Empirical Methods in Natural Language ProcessRow 56: dicting has: Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, | been: | significantly: | alleviated: | but: | not: | Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.: ing, pages 6894–6910, Online and Punta Cana, Do-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 10]
Xiaoqing Geng, Xiwen Chen, Kenny Q. Zhu, Libin
Shen, and Yinggong Zhao. 2020. MICK: A metalearning framework for few-shot relation classification with small training data. In CIKM ’20: The
29th ACM International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management, Virtual Event, Ireland,
October 19-23, 2020, pages 415–424. ACM.
Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Nikolas McNeal, Clay Washington, You Chen, Lang Li, Huan Sun, and Yu Su.
2022. Thinking about GPT-3 in-context learning for
biomedical ie? think again. CoRR, abs/2203.08410.
Xu Han, Hao Zhu, Pengfei Yu, Ziyun Wang, Yuan Yao,
Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2018. FewRel: A
large-scale supervised few-shot relation classification
dataset with state-of-the-art evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 4803–4809,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Iris Hendrickx, Su Nam Kim, Zornitsa Kozareva,
Preslav Nakov, Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha, Sebastian
Padó, Marco Pennacchiotti, Lorenza Romano, and
Stan Szpakowicz. 2010. SemEval-2010 task 8: Multiway classification of semantic relations between pairs
of nominals. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 33–38, Uppsala, Sweden. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch,
Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford,
Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes
Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland,
Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan
Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals,
and Laurent Sifre. 2022. Training compute-optimal
large language models.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large
language models are zero-shot reasoners. CoRR,
abs/2205.11916.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut.
2019. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning
of language representations.
Fangchao Liu, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Boxi Cao, and
Le Sun. 2022a. Pre-training to match for unified lowshot relation extraction. In Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers), pages 5785–
5795, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan,
Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. 2022b. What
makes good in-context examples for GPT-3? In
Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out (DeeLIO
2022): The 3rd Workshop on Knowledge Extraction and Integration for Deep Learning Architectures,
pages 100–114, Dublin, Ireland and Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel,
and Pontus Stenetorp. 2022. Fantastically ordered
prompts and where to find them: Overcoming fewshot prompt order sensitivity. In Proceedings of the
60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers), pages
8086–8098, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yi Luan, Luheng He, Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh
Hajishirzi. 2018. Multi-task identification of entities,
relations, and coreference for scientific knowledge
graph construction. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 3219–3232, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nikolay Malkin, Zhen Wang, and Nebojsa Jojic. 2022.
Coherence boosting: When your pretrained language
model is not paying enough attention. InProceedings
of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers),
pages 8214–8236, Dublin, Ireland. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe,
Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022a. Rethinking the role of demonstrations:
What makes in-context learning work?
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe,
Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022b. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? CoRR,
abs/2202.12837.
Ethan Perez, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2021.
True few-shot learning with language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14,
2021, virtual, pages 11054–11070.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie
Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan, Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George
van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron Huang,
Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu, Erich Elsen,
Siddhant Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine
Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena
Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou,
Arthur Mensch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux, Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong,
Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Yujia

[PAGE 11]
Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin,
Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy,
Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew Johnson,
Blake Hechtman, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel,
William Isaac, Ed Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura
Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub,
Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. 2021. Scaling
language models: Methods, analysis &amp; insights
from training gopher.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2019. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. SentenceBERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERTnetworks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant.
2022. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context
learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 2655–2671, Seattle, United States.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Richard Shin, Christopher Lin, Sam Thomson, Charles
Chen, Subhro Roy, Emmanouil Antonios Platanios,
Adam Pauls, Dan Klein, Jason Eisner, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2021. Constrained language models
yield few-shot semantic parsers. In Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 7699–7715, Online
and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall,
Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du,
YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven Zheng,
Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang,
Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao
Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts,
Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Yanqi Zhou, ChungChing Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc
Pickett, Pranesh Srinivasan, Laichee Man, Kathleen
Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee
Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora
Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew
Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise AgueraArcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed Chi, and Quoc
Le. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications.
Zhen Wan, Qianying Liu, Zhuoyuan Mao, Fei Cheng,
Sadao Kurohashi, and Jiwei Li. 2022. Rescue implicit and long-tail cases: Nearest neighbor relation
extraction. CoRR, abs/2210.11800.
Chenguang Wang, Xiao Liu, Zui Chen, Haoyun Hong,
Jie Tang, and Dawn Song. 2022a. DeepStruct: Pretraining of language models for structure prediction.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022 , pages 803–823, Dublin, Ireland.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V .
Le, Ed H. Chi, and Denny Zhou. 2022b. Selfconsistency improves chain of thought reasoning in
language models. CoRR, abs/2203.11171.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Ed H. Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022.
Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models. CoRR, abs/2201.11903.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, V olume
1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Yuhao Zhang, Victor Zhong, Danqi Chen, Gabor Angeli,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2017. Position-aware
attention and supervised data improve slot filling.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
35–45, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and
Sameer Singh. 2021. Calibrate before use: Improving few-shot performance of language models. In
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 12697–12706. PMLR.
Zexuan Zhong and Danqi Chen. 2021. A frustratingly
easy approach for entity and relation extraction. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,

[PAGE 12]
pages 50–61, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Liu Zhuang, Lin Wayne, Shi Ya, and Zhao Jun. 2021. A
robustly optimized BERT pre-training approach with
post-training. In Proceedings of the 20th Chinese
National Conference on Computational Linguistics ,
pages 1218–1227, Huhhot, China. Chinese Information Processing Society of China.

[PAGE 13]
Hyperparameter In Experiment
Engine text-davinci-003
Temperature 0.0
Max_tokens 256
Top_p 1
Frequency_penalty 0.0
Presence_penalty 0.0
Best_of 1
Logprob 1
Table 3: GPT-3 Hyperparamters.
Dataset Lower bound Upper bound
Semeval 5 30
TACRED 5 15
SciERC 5 30
ACE05 5 25
Table 4: Search range for each dataset.
A Hyperparameters
A.1 GPT-3 Hyperparameters
We use the GPT-3 API during the experiments and
set the hyperparameters as in Table 3. Since the
“Temperature” is set to be0.0, denoting the stable
output of GPT-3, we report the result of the single
run for all experiments. Due to the input length limitation of GPT-3 and the various average lengths of
contexts from each dataset, we set different search
ranges for the number of demonstrations of each
dataset as shown in Table 4.
A.2 Fine-tuning Baseline PURE
We follow their single-sentence setup to keep consistency among datasets as Semeval and TACRED
are both sentence-level RE datasets. For the PLMs,
we also follow PURE by using scibert-scivocabuncased (Beltagy et al., 2019) as the base encoder for SciERC and bert-base-uncased (Devlin
et al., 2019) for the remaining three general domain
datasets. We follow hyperparameters in their paper.
We used 2 NVIDIA RTX3090 for training.
A.3 Sentence Embedding Methods
Gutiérrez et al. (2022) uses the [CLS] of RoBERTalarge as the representation in retrieval, Liu et al.
(2022b) fine-tunes RoBERTa-large on two natural
language inference (NLI) datasets: SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015) and MultiNLI (Williams et al.,
2018) to enhance the quality of sentence embedding. For the sentence embedding method SimCSE in our experiment, we utilize the version:
sup-simcse-bert-base-uncased.
Context: this paper describes a setof principlesdesigned to help archives position themselves to address the management ......Given the context, the relation between principlesand setis MEMBER AND COLLECTION.
GPT-Sent Demonstration
Context: basic diagrams also work well on the computerscreenif they are carefully designed to match the grid of pixels on the screen. Given the context, the relation between screenand computer is[COMPONENT AND WHOLE]
Test Input
Context: thescreen works using ink, just like books and newspapers , but displays the ink particles electronically .Given the context, the relation betweenink and screenis COMPONENT AND WHOLE.
GPT-RE_SimCSE Demonstration
Context: the computer mousehas been the input device of choice for a long time now in the computer world .Given the context, the relation between mouse and computeris COMPONENT AND WHOLE.
GPT-RE_FT Demonstration
RetrievalGPT-SentGPT-RE_SimCSEGPT-RE_FTGPT-3 OutputMEMBER AND COLLECTIONCOMPONENT AND WHOLECOMPONENT AND WHOLE
(a) [COMPONENT AND WHOLE] denotes the gold label
Context: a woman diagnosed with breast cancer today joins a huge sisterhoodof cancer survivorsready to help her along the way ……Given the context, the relation between survivorsand sisterhoodis MEMBER AND COLLECTION.
GPT-Sent Demonstration
Context: the wheelchair foundation donated wheelchairsto peoplewith physical problems in hundred countries .Given the context, the relation between wheelchairsand peopleis [ENTITY AND DESTINATION].
Test Input
Context: the victim of last night 's car accident donated his organsto several patientswho have been waiting for donated organs .Given the context, the relation between organsand patientsis ENTITY AND DESTINATION.
GPT-RE_SimCSE Demonstration
Context: operation homefrontand partners delivered toysto military children.Given the context, the relation between toysand childrenis ENTITY AND DESTINATION.
GPT-RE_FT Demonstration
RetrievalGPT-SentGPT-RE_SimCSEGPT-RE_FTGPT-3 OutputMEMBER AND COLLECTIONENTITY AND DESTINATIONENTITY AND DESTINATION
(b) [ENTITY AND DESTINATION] denotes the gold label.
Figure 10: More casees.

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: GPT-RE_FT“Temperature” is set to be 0.0, denoting the stableRetrieval | GPT-Sent | GPT-RE_SimCSE | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: GPT-RE_FT“Temperature” is set to be 0.0, denoting the stableRetrieval: GPT-3 | GPT-Sent: MEMBER AND | GPT-RE_SimCSE: COMPONENT AND | Unnamed: 0: COMPONENT AND
Row 2: GPT-RE_FT“Temperature” is set to be 0.0, denoting the stableRetrieval: output of GPT-3, we report the result of the single Output | GPT-Sent: COLLECTION | GPT-RE_SimCSE: WHOLE | Unnamed: 0: WHOLE
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=13 index=2]
Columns: We used 2 NVIDIA RTX3090 for training. | Retrieval | GPT-Sent | GPT-RE_SimCSE | GPT-RE_FT
Row 1: We used 2 NVIDIA RTX3090 for training.: | Retrieval: GPT-3 | GPT-Sent: MEMBER AND | GPT-RE_SimCSE: ENTITY AND | GPT-RE_FT: ENTITY AND
Row 2: We used 2 NVIDIA RTX3090 for training.: | Retrieval: Output | GPT-Sent: COLLECTION | GPT-RE_SimCSE: DESTINATION | GPT-RE_FT: DESTINATION
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 14]
Label # Num
PHYS 28
GEN-AFF 12
PER-SOC 11
GEN-AFF 33
PART-WHOLE 13
ART 19
NULL 2329
Table 5: ACE05
B Case Study
To verify the effectiveness of our task-aware
demonstration retrieval, we provide more cases.
For Figure 10a, GPT-Sent retrieves a demonstration that shares the same semantic meaning of “design” with the test input. However, the entity pair
is irrelevant to the concept “design” resulting in a
noisy demonstration. Instead, GPT-RE_SimCSE
retrieves a more relative demonstration with closer
pair of entities sharing the same relation label. Furthermore, GPT-RE_FT retrieves the demonstration
containing both the closing entity pair and the same
linguistic structure between entities. This case emphasizes level-by-level improvement using our proposed methods. Figure 10b shows a similar phenomenon.
C Subset
The number of sampled examples is not only related to the size of the training data itself. A more
important factor is the proportion of NULL . We
have to maintain the original label distribution in
datasets with a high proportion of NULL . Thus, the
rule to sample the subset is to keep the proportion
of each relation label consistent with the original
test set. Table 5 6 are label distributions of two
subsets.
GPT-RE_FT on TACRED surpasses the supervised baseline in the current subset. As we show
above, some labels in TACRED are indeed not well
presented (only 1 example), since TACRED dataset
contains some long-tail labels. We decided to add
additional results of GPT-RE_FT by enlarging our
sampled set to # 3200 (2 times the current version),
and the performance of GPT-RE_FT (k = 15) is
73.16 while the performance of PURE is 70.48.
Label # Num
Per:title 40
PER:city_of_death 1
Org:shareholders 2
Per:origin 12
Org:top_members/employees 36
Org:city_of_headquarters 11
Per:religion 4
Per:city_of_birth 1
Per:employee_of 27
Per:data_of_death 3
Per:other_family 5
Org:website 6
Per:cause_of_death 3
Org:subsidiaries 4
Org:stateorprovince_of_headquarters 5
Per:countries_of_residence 10
Per:siblings 5
Per:stateorprovinces_of_residence 11
Org:alternate_names 27
Per:spouse 4
Per:parents 7
Org:country_of_headquarters 9
Per:age 21
Per:date_of_birth 1
Per:country_of_death 1
Per:schools_attended 4
Org:member_of 3
Per:children 5
Org:parents 7
Per:cities_of_residence 24
Per:stateorprovince_of_brith 1
Per:charges 12
Org:founded 2
Org:country_founded_by 5
Per:stateorprovince_of_death 1
Org:members 4
Per:country_of_birth 1
Per:alternate_names 1
Org:number_of_employees/members 1
Org:dissolved 1
Org:political/religious_affiliation 1
NULL 1271
Table 6: TACRED

[TABLE page=14 index=1]
Columns: For Figure 10a, GPT-Sent retrieves a demonstra- | Per:other_family | 5
Row 1: For Figure 10a, GPT-Sent retrieves a demonstra-: tion that shares the same semantic meaning of “de- | Per:other_family: Org:website | 5: 6
Row 2: For Figure 10a, GPT-Sent retrieves a demonstra-: sign” with the test input. However, the entity pair | Per:other_family: Per:cause_of_death | 5: 3
Row 3: For Figure 10a, GPT-Sent retrieves a demonstra-: is irrelevant to the concept “design” resulting in a | Per:other_family: Org:subsidiaries | 5: 4
Row 4: For Figure 10a, GPT-Sent retrieves a demonstra-: noisy demonstration. Instead, GPT-RE_SimCSE | Per:other_family: Org:stateorprovince_of_headquarters | 5: 5
[/TABLE]