[PAGE 1]

Title
Benchmarking large language models for biomedical natural language
processing applications and recommendations
Author list
Qingyu Chen1,2, Yan Hu3, Xueqing Peng1, Qianqian Xie1, Qiao Jin2, Aidan Gilson4, Maxwell B. Singer4,
Xuguang Ai1, Po-Ting Lai2, Zhizheng Wang2, Vipina K. Keloth1, Kalpana Raja1, Jimin Huang1, Huan He1,
Fongci Lin1, Jingcheng Du3, Rui Zhang5, W. Jim Zheng3, Ron A. Adelman4, Zhiyong Lu2,†, Hua Xu1,†
† Equal correspondence.
Corresponding authors:
Zhiyong Lu, zhiyong.lu@nih.gov
Hua Xu, hua.xu@yale.edu

Affiliations
1. Department of Biomedical Informatics and Data Science, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University,
New Haven, USA
2. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Maryland, USA
3. McWilliams School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas Health Science at Houston,
Houston, USA
4. Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New
Haven, USA
5. Division of Computational Health Sciences, Department of Surgery, Medical School, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA

Abstract
The rapid growth of biomedical literature poses challenges for manual knowledge curation and
synthesis. Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP) automates the process. While Large
Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in general domains, their effectiveness in BioNLP tasks
remains unclear due to limited benchmarks and practical guidelines.
We perform a systematic evaluation of four LLMs—GPT and LLaMA representatives—on 12 BioNLP
benchmarks across six applications. We compare their zero-shot, few-shot, and fine-tuning performance
with traditional fine-tuning of BERT or BART models. We examine inconsistencies, missing information,
hallucinations, and perform cost analysis. Here we show that traditional fine-tuning outperforms zero-
or few-shot LLMs in most tasks. However, closed-source LLMs like GPT-4 excel in reasoning-related tasks
such as medical question answering. Open-source LLMs still require fine-tuning to close performance

[PAGE 2]

gaps. We find issues like missing information and hallucinations in LLM outputs. These results offer
practical insights for applying LLMs in BioNLP.

Introduction
Biomedical literature presents direct obstacles to curation, interpretation, and knowledge discovery due
to its vast volume and domain-specific challenges. PubMed alone sees an increase of approximately
5,000 articles every day, totaling over 36 million as of March 2024 [1]. In specialized fields such as
COVID-19, roughly 10,000 dedicated articles are added each month, bringing the total to over 0.4 million
as of March 2024 [2]. In addition to volume, the biomedical domain also poses challenges with
ambiguous language. For example, a single entity such as Long COVID can be referred to using 763
different terms [3]. Additionally, the same term can describe different entities, as seen with the term
AP2 which can refer to a gene, a chemical, or a cell line [4]. Beyond entities, identifying novel biomedical
relations and capturing semantics in biomedical literature present further challenges [5, 6]
To overcome these challenges, biomedical natural language processing (BioNLP) techniques are used to
assist with manual curation, interpretation, and knowledge discovery. Biomedical language models are
considered as the backbone of BioNLP methods; they leverage massive amounts of biomedical literature
and capture biomedical semantic representations in an unsupervised or self-supervised manner. Early
biomedical language models are non-contextual embeddings (e.g., word2vec and fastText) that uses
fully-connected neural networks such as BioWordVec and BioSentVec [4, 7, 8]. Since the inception of
transformers, biomedical language models have adopted their architecture, and can be categorized into
(1) encoder-based, masked language models using the encoder from the transformer architecture such
as the biomedical bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT) family including
BioBERT and PubMedBERT [9-11], (2) decoder-based, generative language models using the decoder
from the transformer architecture such as the generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) family including
BioGPT and BioMedLM [12, 13], and (3) encoder-decoder-based, using both encoders and decoders such
as BioBART and Scifive [14, 15]. BioNLP studies fine-tuned those language models and demonstrated
that they achieved the SOTA performance in various BioNLP applications [10, 16]; and those models
have been successfully employed in PubMed-scale downstream applications such as biomedical
sentence search [17] and COVID-19 literature mining [2].
Recently, the latest closed-source GPT models, including GPT-3 and, more notably, GPT-4, have made
significant strides and garnered considerable attention from society. A key characteristic of these
models is the exponential growth of their parameters. For instance, GPT-3 has ~175 billion parameters
which is hundreds larger than GPT-2. Models of this magnitude are commonly referred to as Large
Language Models (LLMs) [18]. Moreover, the enhancement of LLMs is achieved through reinforcement
learning with human feedback, thereby aligning text generation with human preferences [19]. For
instance, GPT-3.5 builds upon the foundation of GPT-3 using reinforcement learning techniques,
resulting in significantly improved performance in natural language understanding [20]. The launch of
ChatGPT – a chatbot using GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 – has marked a milestone in generative artificial
intelligence. It has demonstrated strong capabilities in the tasks that its predecessors fail to do; for
instance, GPT-4 passed over 20 academic and professional exams including the Uniform Bar Exam, SAT
Evidence-Based Reading & Writing, and Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program [21]. The

[PAGE 3]

remarkable advancements have sparked extensive discussions among society, with excitement and
concerns alike. In addition to closed-source LLMs, open-source LLMs such as LLaMA [22] and Mixtral [23]
have been widely adopted in downstream applications and also used as the basis for continuous
pretraining domain-specific resources. In the biomedical domain, PMC LLaMA (7B and 13B) is one of the
first biomedical domain-specific LLMs that continuously pretrained LLaMA on 4.8M biomedical papers
and 30K medical textbooks [24]. Meditron (7B and 70B), a more recent biomedical domain-specific LLM,
employed a similar continuous pretraining strategy on LLaMA 2.
Pioneering studies have conducted early experiments on LLMs in the biomedical domain and reported
encouraging results. For instance, Bubeck et al. studied the ability of GPT-4 in a wide spectrum such as
coding, mathematics, and interactions with humans. This early study reported biomedical-related
results, indicating that GPT-4 achieved an accuracy of approximately 80% in the US Medical Licensing
Exam (Step 1, 2, and 3), along with an example of using GPT-4 to verify claims in a medical note. Lee et
al. also demonstrated use cases of GPT-4 for answering medical questions, generating summaries from
patient reports, assisting clinical decision-making, and creating educational materials [24]. Wong et al.
conducted a study on GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 for end-to-end clinical trial matching, handling complex
eligibility criteria, and extracting complex matching logic [25]. Liu et al. explored the performance of
GPT-4 on radiology domain-specific use cases [26]. Nori et al. further found that general-domain LLMs
with advanced prompt engineering can achieve the highest accuracy in medical question answering
without fine-tuning [27]. Recent reviews also summarize related studies in detail [28-30].
These results demonstrate the potential of using LLMs in BioNLP applications, particularly when minimal
manually curated gold standard data is available and fine-tuning or retraining for every new task is not
required. In the biomedical domain, a primary challenge is the limited availability of labeled datasets,
which have a significantly lower scale than those in the general domain (e.g., a biomedical sentence
similarity dataset only has 100 labeled instances in total [31]) [32, 33]. This challenges the fine-tuning
approach because (1) models fine-tuned on limited labeled datasets may not be generalizable, and (2) it
becomes more challenging to fine-tune the models with larger size.
Motivated by the early experiments, it is important to systematically assess effectiveness of LLMs in
BioNLP tasks and comprehend their impact on BioNLP method development and downstream users.
Table 1 provides a detailed comparison of representative studies in this context. While our primary
focus is on the biomedical domain, specifically the evaluation of LLMs using biomedical literature, we
have also included two representative studies in the clinical domain (evaluating LLMs using clinical
records) for reference. There are several primary limitations. First, most evaluation studies primarily
assessed GPT-3 or GPT-3.5, which may not provide a full spectrum of representative LLMs from different
categories. For instance, few studies evaluated more advanced closed-source LLMs such as GPT-4, LLM
representatives from the general domain such as LLaMA [22], and biomedical domain-specific LLMs such
as PMC-LLaMA [34]. Second, the existing studies mostly assessed extraction tasks where the gold
standard is fixed. Few of these studies evaluated generative tasks such as text summarization and text
simplification where the gold standard is free-text. Arguably, existing transformer models have
demonstrated satisfactory performance in extractive tasks, while generative tasks remain a challenge in
terms of achieving similar levels of proficiency. Therefore, it is imperative to assess how effective LLMs
are in the context of generative tasks in BioNLP, examining whether they can complement existing
models. Third, most existing studies only reported quantitative assessments such as the F1-score, with
limited emphasis on qualitative evaluations. However, conducting qualitative evaluations (e.g., assessing

[PAGE 4]

the quality of LLM generated text and categorizing inconsistent or hallucinated responses) to
understand of the errors and impacts of LLMs on downstream applications in the biomedical domain are
arguably more critical than mere quantitative metrics. For instance, studies on LLMs found a relatively
low correlation between human judgments and automatic measures, such as ROUGE-L, commonly
applied to text summarization tasks in the clinical domain [35]. Finally, it is worth noting that several
studies did not provide public access to their associated data or codes. For example, few studies have
made the prompts or selected examples for few-shot learning available. This hinders reproducibility and
also presents challenges in evaluating new LLMs using the same setting for a fair comparison.
In this study, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation of LLMs in BioNLP applications to examine their
great potentials as well as limitations and errors. Our study has three main contributions.
First, we performed comprehensive evaluations on four representative LLMs: GPT-3.5 and GPT-4
(representatives from closed-source LLMs), LLaMA 2 (a representative from open-sourced LLMs), and
PMC LLaMA (a representative from biomedical domain-specific LLMs). We evaluated them on 12 BioNLP
datasets across six applications: (1) named entity recognition, which extracts biological entities of
interest from free-text, (2) relation extraction, which identifies relations among entities, (3) multi-label
document classification, which categorizes documents into broad categories, (4) question answering,
which provides answers to medical questions, (5) text summarization, which produces a coherent
summary of an input text, and (6) text simplification, which generates understandable content of an
input text. The models were evaluated under four settings: zero-shot, static few-shot, dynamic K-nearest
few-shot, and fine-tuning where applicable. We compared these models against the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) approaches that use fine-tuned, domain-specific BERT or BART models. Both BERT and BART
models are well-established in BioNLP research.
Our results suggest that SOTA fine-tuning approaches outperformed zero- and few-shot LLMs in most of
the BioNLP tasks. These approaches achieved a macro-average approximately 15% higher than the best
zero- and few-shot LLM performance across 12 benchmarks (0.65 vs. 0.51) and over 40% higher in
information extraction tasks such as relation extraction (0.79 vs. 0.33). However, closed-source LLMs
such as GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 demonstrated better zero- and few-shot performance in reasoning-related
tasks such as medical question answering, where they outperformed the SOTA fine-tuning approaches.
In addition, they exhibited lower-than-SOTA but reasonable performance in generation-related tasks
such as text summarization and simplification, showing competitive accuracy and readability, as well as
showing potential in semantic understanding tasks such as document-level classification. Among the
LLMs, GPT-4 showed the overall highest performance, especially due to its remarkable reasoning
capability. However, it comes with a trade-off, being 60 to 100 times more expensive than GPT-3.5. In
contrast, open-sourced LLMs such as LLaMA 2 did not demonstrate robust zero- and few-shot
performance – they still require fine-tuning to bridge the performance gap for BioNLP applications.
Second, we conducted a thorough manual validation on collectively over hundreds of thousands sample
outputs from the LLMs. For extraction and classification tasks where the gold standard is fixed (e.g.,
relation extraction and multi-label document classification), we examined (1) missing output, when
LLMs fail to provide the requested output, (2) inconsistent output, when LLMs produce different outputs
for similar instances, and (3) hallucinated output, when LLMs fail to address the user input and may
contain repetitions and misinformation in the output [36]. For text summarization tasks, two healthcare
professionals performed manual evaluations assessing Accuracy, Completeness, and Readability. The

[PAGE 5]

results revealed prevalent cases of missing, inconsistent, and hallucinated outputs, especially for LLaMA
2 under the zero-shot setting. For instance, it had over 102 hallucinated cases (32% of the total testing
instances) and 69 inconsistent cases (22%) for a multi-label document classification dataset.
Finally, we provided recommendations for downstream users on the best practice to use LLMs in BioNLP
applications. We also noted two open problems. First, the current data and evaluation paradigms in
BioNLP are tailored to supervised methods and may not be fair to LLMs. For instance, the results
showed that automatic metrics for text summarization may not align with manual evaluations. Also, the
datasets that specifically target tasks where LLMs excel, such as reasoning, are limited in the biomedical
domain. Revisiting data and evaluation paradigms in BioNLP are key to maximizing the benefits of LLMs
in BioNLP applications. Second, addressing errors, missing information, and inconsistencies is crucial to
minimize the risks associated with LLMs in biomedical and clinical applications. We strongly encourage a
community effort to find better solutions to mitigate these issues.
We believe that the findings of this study will be beneficial for BioNLP downstream users and will also
contribute to further enhancing the performance of LLMs in BioNLP applications. The established
benchmarks and baseline performance could serve as the basis for evaluating new LLMs in the
biomedical domain. To ensure reproducibility and facilitate benchmarking, we have made the relevant
data, models, and results publicly accessible through https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14025500[37].

[PAGE 6]

Results
Quantitative evaluations
Table 3 illustrates the primary evaluation metric results and their macro-averages of the LLMs under
zero/few-shot (static one- and five-shot) and fine-tuning settings over the 12 datasets. The results on
specific datasets were consistent with those independently reported by other studies, such as an
accuracy of 0.4462 and 0.7471 on MedQA for GPT-3.5 zero-shot and GPT-4 zero-shot, respectively
(0.4988 and 0.7156 in our study, respectively) [38]. Similarly, a micro-F1 of 0.6224 and 0.6720 on HoC
and LitCovid for GPT-3.5 zero-shot was reported, respectively (0.6605 and 0.6707 in our study,
respectively) [39]. An accuracy of 0.7790 on PubMedQA was also reported for the fine-tuned PMC
LLaMA 13B (combined multiple question answering datasets for fine-tuning) [34]; our study also
reported a similar accuracy of 0.7680 using the PubMedQA training set only. We further summarized
detailed results in Supplementary Information S2 Quantitative evaluation results including secondary
metric results in S2.2, performance mean, variance, and confidence intervals in S2.3, statistical test
results in S2.4, and dynamic K-nearest few-shot results in S2.5.
SOTA vs. LLMs. The results of SOTA fine-tuning approaches for comparison are provided in Table 3.
Recall that the SOTA approaches utilized fine-tuned (domain-specific) language models. For the
extractive and classification tasks, the SOTA approaches fine-tuned biomedical domain-specific BERT
models such as BioBERT and PubMedBERT. For text summarization and simplification tasks, the SOTA
approaches fine-tuned BART models.
As demonstrated in Table 3, the SOTA fine-tuning approaches had a macro-average of 0.6536 across the
12 datasets, whereas the best LLM counterparts were 0.4561, 0.4750, 0.4862, and 0.5131 under zeroshot, one-shot, five-shot, and fine-tuning settings, respectively. It outperformed the zero- and few-shot
of LLMs in 10 out of the 12 datasets. It had much higher performance especially in information
extraction tasks. For instance, for NCBI Disease, the SOTA approach achieved an entity-level F1-score of
0.9090, whereas the best results of LLMs (GPT-4) under zero- and one-shot settings were 30% lower
(0.5988). The performance of LLMs is closer under the fine-tuning setting, with LLaMA 2 13B achieving
an entity-level F1-score of 0.8682, but it is still lower. Notably, the SOTA fine-tuning approaches are very
strong baselines – they were much more sophisticated than simple fine-tuning over a foundation model.
Continuing with the example of NCBI Disease, the SOTA fine-tuning approach generated large-scale
weak labeled examples and used contrastive learning to learn a general representation.
In contrast, the LLMs outperformed the SOTA fine-tuning approaches in question answering. For
MedQA, the SOTA approach had an accuracy of 0.4195. GPT-4 under the zero-shot setting had almost
30% higher accuracy in absolute difference (0.7156), and GPT-3.5 also had approximately 8% higher
accuracy (0.4988) under the zero-shot setting. For PubMedQA, the SOTA approach had an accuracy of
0.7340. GPT-4 under the one-shot setting had a similar accuracy (0.7100) and showed higher accuracy
with more shots (0.7580 under the five-shot setting), as we will show later. Both LLaMA 2 13B and PMC
LLaMA 13B also had higher accuracy under the fine-tuning setting (0.8040 and 0.7680, respectively). In
this case, GPT-3.5 did not achieve higher accuracy over the SOTA approach, but it already had a
competitive accuracy (0.6950) under the five-shot setting.

[PAGE 7]

Comparisons among the LLMs. Comparing among the LLMs, under zero/few-shot settings, the results
demonstrate that GPT-4 consistently had the highest performance. Under the zero-shot setting, the
macro-average of GPT-4 was 0.4561, which is approximately 7% higher than GPT-3.5 (0.3814) and
almost double than LLaMA 2 13B (0.2362). It achieved the highest performance in nine out of the 12
datasets, and its performance was also within 3% of the best result for the remaining three datasets.
The one-shot and five-shot settings showed very similar patterns.
In addition, LLaMA2 13B exhibited substantially lower performance than GPT-3.5 (15% lower and 10%
lower) and GPT-4 (22% lower and 17% lower) under zero- and one-shot settings. It had up to six times
lower performance in specific datasets compared to the best LLM results; for example, 0.1286 vs. 0.7109
for HoC under the zero-shot setting. These results suggest that LLaMA2 13B still requires fine-tuning to
achieve similar performance and bridge the performance gap. Fine-tuning improved LLaMA 2 13B's
macro-average from 0.2837 to 0.5131. Notably, its performance under the fine-tuning setting is slightly
higher than the zero- and few-shot performance of GPT-4. Fine-tuning LLaMA 2 13B generally improved
its performance in all tasks except text summarization and text simplification. A key reason for its
performance limitation is that the datasets have much longer input context than its allowed input
tokens (4,096) such that fine-tuning did not help in this case. This observation also motivates further
research efforts on extending LLMs' context window [40, 41].
Under the fine-tuning setting, the results also indicate that PMC LLaMA 13B, as a continuously
pretrained biomedical domain-specific LLM, did not achieve an overall higher performance than LLaMA
2 13B. Fine-tuned LLaMA 2 13B had better performance than that of PMC LLaMA 13B in 10 out of the 12
datasets. As mentioned, we reproduced similar results reported in PMC LLaMA study [34]. For instance,
it reported an accuracy of 0.7790 on PubMedQA with fine-tuning multiple question answering datasets
together. We got a very similar accuracy of 0.7680 when fine-tuning PMC LLaMA 13B on the PubMedQA
dataset only. However, we also found that directly fine-tuning of LLaMA 2 13B using the exact same
setting resulted in better or at least similar performance.
Few-shot and cost analysis
Figure 1 further illustrates the performance of the dynamic K-nearest few-shot and the associated cost
with the increasing number of shots. The detailed results are also provided in Supplementary
Information S2. Dynamic K-nearest few-shot was conducted for K values of one, two, and five. For
comparison, we also provided the zero-shot and static one-shot performance in the figure. The results
suggest that dynamic K-nearest few-shot is most effective for multi-label document classification and
question answering. For instance, for the LitCovid dataset, GPT-4 had a macro-F1 of 0.5901 under the
static one-shot setting; in contrast, its macro-F1 under dynamic one-nearest shot was 0.6500, and
further increased to 0.7055 with five-nearest shots. Similarly, GPT-3.5 exhibited improvements, with its
macro-F1 under the static one-shot setting at 0.6009, compared to 0.6364 and 0.6484 for dynamic oneshot and five-shot, respectively. For question answering, the improvement was not as high as for multilabel document classification, but the overall trend showed a steady increase, especially considering
that GPT-4 already had similar or higher performance than SOTA approaches with zero-shot. For
instance, its accuracy on PubMedQA was 0.71 with a static one-shot; the accuracy increased to 0.72 and
0.75 under dynamic one-shot and five-shot, respectively.

[PAGE 8]

In contrast, the results show that dynamic K-nearest few-shot was less effective for other tasks. For
instance, the dynamic one-shot performance is lower than the static one-shot performance for both GPT
models on the two named entity recognition datasets, and by increasing the number of dynamic shots
does not help either. Similar findings are also observed in relation extraction. For text summarization
and text simplification tasks, the dynamic K-nearest few-shot performance was slightly higher in two
datasets, but in general, it was very similar to the static one-shot performance. In addition, the results
also suggest that increasing the number of shots does not necessarily improve the performance. For
instance, GPT-4 with dynamic five-shot did not have the highest performance in eight out of the 12
datasets. Similar findings were reported in other studies, where the performance of GPT-3.5 with fiveshot learning was lower than that of zero-shot learning for natural language inference tasks [39].
Figure 1 further compares the costs per 100 instances of using GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. The cost is calculated
based on the number of input and output tokens with unit price. We used gpt-4-0613 for extractive
tasks and gpt-4-32k-0613 for generative tasks because the input and output context are much longer
especially with more shots. GPT-4 generally exhibited the highest performance, as shown in both Table 3
and Figure 1; however, the cost analysis results also demonstrate a clear trade-off, with GPT-4 being 60
to 100 times more expensive. For extractive and classification tasks, the actual cost per 100 instances of
GPT-4 for five-shots ranges from approximately $2 for sentence-level inputs to around $10 for abstractlevel inputs. This cost is 60 to 70 times higher than that of GPT-3.5, which costs approximately $0.03 for
sentence-level inputs and around $0.16 for abstract-level inputs with five-shots. For generative tasks,
the cost difference is even more pronounced, scaling to 100 times or more expensive. One reason is that
GPT-4 32K has a higher unit price, and tasks like text summarization involve much longer input and
output tokens. Taking the PubMed Text Summarization dataset as an example, GPT-4 cost $84.02 per
100 instances with five-shots, amounting to approximately $5,600 to inference the entire testing set. In
comparison, GPT-3 only cost $0.71 per 100 instances for five-shots, totaling around $48 for the entire
testing set.
Based on both performance and cost results, it indicates that the cost difference does not necessarily
scale to the performance difference, except for question answering tasks. GPT-4 exhibited 20% to 30%
higher accuracy than GPT-3.5 in question answering tasks, and higher than the SOTA approaches; for
other tasks, the performance difference is much smaller with a significantly higher cost. For instance,
the performance of GPT-4 on both text simplification tasks was within 2% of that of GPT-3.5, but the
actual cost was more than 100 times higher.
Qualitative evaluations
Error analysis on named entity recognition
Figure 2 (A) further shows an error analysis on the named entity recognition benchmark NCBI Disease,
where the performance of LLMs under zero- and few-shot settings was substantially lower than SOTA
results (e.g., the LLaMA 2 13B zero-shot performance is almost 70% lower). Recall that named entity
recognition extracts entities from free text, and the benchmarks evaluate the accuracy of these
extracted entities. We examined all the predictions on full test sets and categorized into four types: (1)
correct entities, where the predicted entities are correct with both text spans and entity types, (2)
wrong entities, where the predicted entities are incorrect, (3) missing entities, where the true entities
are not predicted, and (4) boundary issues, where the predicted entities are correct but with different

[PAGE 9]

text spans than the gold standard, as shown in Figure 2(A). The results reveal that the LLMs can predict
up to 512 entities correctly out of 960 in total, explaining the low F1-score. As the SOTA model is not
publicly available, we used an alternate fine-tuned BioBERT model on NCBI Disease from an
independent study (https://huggingface.co/ugaray96/biobert_ncbi_disease_ner), which had an entitylevel F1-score of 0.8920 for comparison. It predicted 863 entities out of 960 correctly. The wrong
entities, missing entities, and boundary issues were 111, 97, and 269, respectively.
In addition, Figure 2(A) also shows that GPT-4 had the lowest number of wrong entities, whereas other
categories have a similar prevalence to GPT-3.5, which explains its higher F1-score overall. Furthermore,
providing one shot did not alter the errors for GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 compared to their zero-shot settings,
but it dramatically changed the results for LLaMA 2 13B. Under one-shot, LLaMA 2 13B had 449 correctly
predicted entities, compared to 148 under zero-shot. Additionally, its missing entities also reduced from
812 to 511 with one-shot, but it also had a trade-off of more boundary issues and wrong entities.
Evaluations on inconsistencies, missing information, and hallucinations
Figures 2(B)-(D) present the qualitative evaluation results on ChemProt, HoC, and MedQA, respectively.
Recall that we categorized inconsistencies, missing information, and hallucinations on the tasks where
the gold standard is a fixed classification type or a multiple-choice option. Table 4 also provides detailed
examples. The findings show prevalent inconsistent, missing, or hallucinated responses, particularly in
LLaMA 2 13B zero-shot responses. For instance, it exhibited 506 hallucinated responses (~3% out of the
total 16,943 instances) and 2,376 inconsistent responses (14%) for ChemProt. In the case of HoC, there
were 102 (32%) hallucinated responses and 69 (22%) inconsistent responses. Similarly, for MedQA,
there were 402 (32%) inconsistent responses. In comparison, GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 exhibited substantially
fewer cases. GPT-3.5 showed a small number of inconsistent responses for ChemProt and HoC, and a
few missing responses for MedQA. On the other hand, GPT-4 did not exhibit any such cases for
ChemProt and HoC, while displaying a few missing responses for MedQA.
It is worth noting that inconsistent responses do not necessarily imply that they fail to address the
prompts; rather, the responses answer the prompt but in different formats. In contrast, hallucinated
cases do not address the prompts and may repeat the prompts or contain irrelevant information. All
such instances pose challenges for automatic extraction or post-processing and may require manual
review. As a potential solution, we observed that adding just one shot could significantly reduce such
cases, especially for LLaMA 2 13B, which exhibited prevalent instances in zero-shot. As illustrated in
Figure 2(B), LLaMA 2 13B one-shot dramatically reduced these cases in ChemProt and MedQA. Similarly,
its hallucinated responses decreased from 102 to 0, and inconsistent cases decreased from 69 to 23 in
HoC with one-shot. Another solution is fine-tuning, which we did not find any such cases during the
manual examination, albeit with a trade-off of computational resources.
Evaluations on accuracy, completeness, and readability
Figure 3 presents the qualitative evaluation results on the PubMed Text Summarization dataset. In
Figure 3(A), the overall results in accuracy, completeness, and readability for the four models on 50
random samples are depicted. The evaluation results in digits are further demonstrated in Table 5 for
complementary. Detailed results with statistical analysis and examples are available in Supplementary
Information S3. The fine-tuned BART model used in the SOTA approach [42], serving as the baseline,
achieved an accuracy of 4.76 (out of 5), a completeness of 4.02, and a readability of 4.05. In contrast,

[PAGE 10]

both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 demonstrated similar and slightly higher accuracy (4.79 and 4.83, respectively)
and statistically significantly higher readability than the fine-tuned BART model (4.66 and 4.73), but
statistically significantly lower completeness (3.61 and 3.57) under the zero-shot setting. The LLaMA 2
13B zero-shot performance is substantially lower in all three aspects.
Figure 3(B) further compares GPT-4 to GPT-3.5 and the fine-tuned BART model in detail. In the
comparison between GPT-4 and GPT-3.5, GPT-4 had a slightly higher number of winning cases in the
three aspects (4 winning cases vs. 1 losing case for accuracy, 17 vs. 13 for completeness, and 13 vs. 6 for
readability). Most of the cases resulted in a tie. When comparing GPT-4 to the fine-tuned BART model,
GPT-4 had significantly more winning cases for readability (34 vs. 1) with much fewer winning cases for
completeness (9 vs. 22).
Discussions
First, the SOTA fine-tuning approaches outperformed zero- and few-shot performance of LLMs in most
of BioNLP applications. As demonstrated in Table 3, it had the best performance in 10 out of the 12
benchmarks. In particular, it outperformed zero- and few-shot LLMs by a large margin in information
extraction and classification tasks such as named entity recognition and relation extraction, which is
consistent to the existing studies [43, 44]. In contrast to the other tasks such as medical question
answering, named entity recognition and relation extraction require limited reasoning and extract
information directly from inputs at the sentence-level. Zero- and few-shot learning may not be
appropriate or sufficient for these conditions. For those tasks, arguably, fine-tuned biomedical domainspecific language models are still the first choice and have already set a high bar according to the
literature [32].
In addition, closed-source LLMs such as GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 demonstrated reasonable zero- and few-shot
capabilities for three BioNLP tasks. The most promising task that outperformed the SOTA fine-tuning
approaches is medical question answering which involves reasoning [45]. As shown in Table 3 and Figure
1, GPT-4 already outperformed previous fine-tuned SOTA approaches in MedQA and PubMedQA with
zero- or few-shot learning. This is also supported by the existing studies on medical question answering
[38, 46]. The second potential use case is text summarization and simplification. As shown in Table 3,
those tasks are still less favored by the automatic evaluation measures; however, manual evaluation
results show both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 had higher readability and competitive accuracy compared to the
SOTA fine-tuning approaches. Other studies reported similar findings regarding the low correlation
between automatic and manual evaluations [35, 47]. The third possible use case – though still
underperformed by previous fine-tuned SOTA approaches – document-level classification which involves
semantic understanding. As shown in Figure 1, GPT-4 achieved over a 0.7 F1-score with dynamic Knearest shot for both multi-label document-level classification benchmarks.
In addition to closed-source LLMs, open-source LLMs such as LLaMA 2 do not demonstrate strong zero-
and few-shot capabilities. While there are other open-source LLMs available, LLaMA 2 remains as a
strong representative [48]. Results in Table 1 suggest that its overall zero-shot performance is 15% and
22% lower than that of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, respectively, and up to 60% lower in specific BioNLP tasks.
Not only does it exhibit suboptimal performance, but the results in Figure 2 also demonstrate that its
zero-shot responses frequently contain inconsistencies, missing elements, and hallucinations,
accounting for up to 30% of the full testing set instances. Therefore, fine-tuning open-source LLMs for

[PAGE 11]

BioNLP tasks is still necessary to bridge the gap. Only through fine-tuning LLaMA 2, its overall
performance is slightly higher than the one-shot GPT-4 (4%). However, it is worth noting that the model
sizes of LLaMA 2 and PMC LLaMA are significantly smaller than those of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, making it
challenging to evaluate them on the same level. Additionally, open-source LLMs have the advantage of
continued development and local deployment.
Another primary finding on open-source LLMs is that the results do not indicate significant performance
improvement from continuously biomedical pre-trained LLMs (PMC LLaMA 13B vs. LLaMA 2 13B). As
mentioned, our study reproduced similar results reported in PMC LLaMA 13B; however, we also found
that directly fine-tuning LLaMA 2 yielded better or at least similar performance — and this is consistent
across all 12 benchmarks. In the biomedical domain, representative foundation LLMs such as PMC
LLaMA used 32 A100 GPUs [34], and Meditron used 128 A100 GPUs to continuously pretrain from
LLaMA or LLaMA 2 [49]. Our evaluation did not find significant performance improvement for PMC
LLaMA; the Meditron study also only reported ~3% improvement itself and only evaluated on question
answering datasets. At a minimum, the results suggest the need for a more effective and sustainable
approach to developing biomedical domain-specific LLMs.
The automatic metrics for text summarization and simplification tasks may not align with manual
evaluations. As the quantitative results on text summarization and generation demonstrated, commonly
used automatic evaluations such as Rouge, BERT, and BART scores consistently favored the fine-tuned
BART's generated text, while manual evaluations show different results, indicating that GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4 had competitive accuracy and much higher readability even under the zero-shot setting. Existing
studies also reported that the automatic measures on LLM generated text may not correlate to human
preference [35, 47]. The MS^2 benchmark used in the study also discussed the limitation of automatic
measures specifically for text summarization [50]. Additionally, the results highlight that completeness
is a primary limitation when adapting GPT models to biomedical text generation tasks despite its
competitive accuracy and readability scores.
Last, our evaluation on both performance and cost demonstrates a clear trade-off when using LLMs in
practice. GPT-4 had the overall best performance in the 12 benchmarks, with an 8% improvement over
GPT-3.5 but also at a higher cost (60 to 100 times higher than GPT-3.5). Notably, GPT-4 showed
significantly higher performance particularly in question answering tasks which involve reasoning, such
as over 20% improvement in MedQA compared to GPT-3.5. This observation is consistent with findings
from other studies [27, 38]. Note that newer versions of GPT-4, such as GPT-4 Turbo, may further reduce
the cost of using GPT-4.
These findings lead to recommendations for downstream users to apply LLMs in BioNLP applications,
summarized in Figure 4. It provides suggestions on which BioNLP applications are recommended (or not)
for LLMs, categorized by conditions (e.g., the zero/few-shot setting when computational resources are
limited) and additional tips (e.g., when advanced prompt engineering is more effective).
We also recognize the following two open problems and encourage a community effort for better usage
of LLMs in BioNLP applications.
Adapting both data and evaluation paradigms is essential to maximize the benefits of LLMs in BioNLP
applications. Arguably, the current datasets and evaluation settings in BioNLP are tailored to supervised
(fine-tuning) methods and is not fair for LLMs. Those issues challenge the direct comparison between

[PAGE 12]

the fine-tuned biomedical domain-specific language models and zero/few shot of LLMs. The datasets for
the tasks where LLMs excel are also limited in the biomedical domain. Further, the manual measures on
biomedical text summarization also showed different results than that of all three automatic measures.
These collectively suggest the current BioNLP evaluation frameworks have limitations when they are
applied to LLMs [35, 51]. They may not be able to accurately assess the full benefits of LLMs in
biomedical applications, calling for development of new evaluation datasets and methods for LLMs in
bioNLP tasks.
Addressing inconsistencies, missingness, and hallucinations produced by LLMs is critical. The prevalence
of inconsistencies, missingness, and hallucinations generated by LLMs is of concern, and we argue that
they must be addressed for deployment. Our results demonstrate that providing just one shot could
significantly reduce the occurrence of such issues, offering a simple solution. However, thorough
examination in real-world scenario validations is still necessary. Additionally, more advanced approaches
for validating LLMs' responses are expected for further improvement of their reliability and usability
[47].
This study also has several limitations that should be acknowledged. While this study examined strong
LLM representatives from each category (closed-source, open-source, and biomedical domain-specific),
it is important to note that there are other LLMs, such as BARD [52] and Mistral [53], that have
demonstrated strong performance in the literature. Additionally, while we investigated zero-shot, oneshot, dynamic K-nearest few-shot, and fine-tuning techniques, each of them has variations, and there
are also new approaches [77]. Given the rapidly growing nature of this area, our study cannot cover all
of them. Instead, our aim is to establish baseline performance on the main BioNLP applications using
commonly used LLMs and methods as representatives, and to make the datasets, methods, codes, and
results publicly available. This enables downstream users to understand when and how to apply LLMs in
their own use cases and to compare new LLMs and associated methods on the same benchmarks. In the
future, we also plan to assess LLMs in real-world scenarios in the biomedical domain to further broaden
the scope of the study.

Methods
Evaluation tasks, datasets, and metrics
Table 2 presents a summary of the evaluation tasks, datasets, and metrics. We benchmarked the models
on the full testing sets of the twelve datasets from six BioNLP applications, which are BC5CDR-chemical
and NCBI-disease for Named Entity Recognition, ChemProt and DDI2013 for relation extraction, HoC and
LitCovid for multi-label document classification, and MedQA and PubMedQA for question answering,
PubMed Text Summarization and MS^2 for text summarization, and Cochrane PLS and PLOS Text
Simplification for text simplification. These datasets have been widely used in benchmarking biomedical
text mining challenges [54-56] and evaluating biomedical language models [9-11, 16]. The datasets are
also available in the repository. We evaluated the datasets using the official evaluation metrics provided
by the original dataset description papers, as well as commonly used metrics for method development
or applications with the datasets, as documented in Table 2. Note that it is challenging to have a single
one-size-fits-all metric, and some datasets and related studies used multiple evaluation metrics.

[PAGE 13]

Therefore, we also adopted secondary metrics for additional evaluations. A detailed description is
below.
Named entity recognition. Named entity recognition is a task that involves identifying entities of interest
from free text. The biomedical entities can be described in various ways, and resolving the ambiguities is
crucial [57]. Named entity recognition is typically a sequence labeling task, where each token is classified
into a specific entity type. BC5CDR-chemical [58] and NCBI-disease [59] are manually annotated named
entity recognition datasets for chemicals and diseases mentioned in biomedical literature, respectively.
The exact match (that is, the predicted tokens must have the same text spans as the gold standard) F1score was used to quantify the model performance.
Relation extraction. Relation extraction involves identifying the relationships between entities, which is
important for drug repurposing and knowledge discovery [60]. Relation extraction is typically a multiclass classification problem, where a sentence or passage is given with identified entities and the goal is
to classify the relation type between them. ChemProt [54] and DDI2013 [61] are manually curated
relation extraction datasets for protein-protein interactions and drug-drug interactions from biomedical
literature, respectively. Macro and micro F1-scores were used to quantify the model performance.
Multi-label document classification. Multi-label document classification identifies semantic categories at
the document-level. The semantic categories are effective for grasping the main topics and searching for
relevant literature in the biomedical domain [62]. Unlike multi-class classification, which assigns only
one label to an instance, multi-label classification can assign up to N labels to an instance. HoC [63] and
LitCovid [55] are manually annotated multi-label document classification datasets for hallmarks of
cancer (10 labels) and COVID-19 topics (7 labels), respectively. Macro and Micro F1 scores were used as
the primary and secondary evaluation metrics, respectively.
Question answering. Question answering evaluates the knowledge and reasoning capabilities of a
system in answering a given biomedical question with or without associated contexts [45]. Biomedical
QA datasets such as MedQA and PubMedQA have been widely used in the evaluation of language
models [64]. The MedQA dataset is collected from questions in the United States Medical License
Examination (USMLE), where each instance contains a question (usually a patient description) and five
answer choices (e.g., five potential diagnoses) [65]. The PubMedQA dataset includes biomedical
research questions from PubMed, and the task is to use yes, no, or maybe to answer these questions
with the corresponding abstracts [66]. Accuracy and macro F1-score are used as the primary and
secondary evaluation metrics, respectively.
Text summarization. Text summarization produces a concise and coherent summary of a longer
documents or multiple documents while preserving its essential content. We used two primary
biomedical text summarization datasets: the PubMed text summarization benchmark [67] and MS^2
[50]. The PubMed text summarization benchmark focuses on single document summarization where the
input is a full PubMed article, and the gold standard output is its abstract. M2^2 in contrast focuses on
multi-document summarization where the input is a collection of PubMed articles, and the gold
standard output is the abstract of a systematic review study that cites those articles. Both benchmarks
used the ROUGE-L score as the primary evaluation metric; BERT score and BART score were used as
secondary evaluation metrics.

[PAGE 14]

Text simplification. Text simplification rephrases complex texts into simpler language while maintaining
the original meaning, making the information more accessible to a broader audience. We used two
primary biomedical text simplification datasets: Cochrane PLS [68] and the PLOS text simplification
benchmark [69]. Cochrane PLS consists of the medical documents from the Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews and the corresponding plain-language summary (PLS) written by the authors. The
PLOS text simplification benchmark consists of articles from PLOS journals and the corresponding
technical summary and PLS written by the authors. The ROUGE-L score was used as the primary
evaluation metric. Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level (FKGL) and Dale-Chall Readability Score (DCRS), two
commonly used evaluation metrics on readability [70] were used as the secondary evaluation metrics.

Baselines
For each dataset, we reported the reported SOTA fine-tuning result before the rise of LLMs as the
baseline. The SOTA approaches involved fine-tuning (domain-specific) language models such as
PubMedBERT [16], BioBERT [9], or BART [71] as the backbone. The fine-tuning still requires scalable
manually labeled instances, which is challenging in the biomedical domain [32]. In contrast, LLMs may
have the advantage when minimal manually labeled instances are available, and they do not require
fine-tuning or retraining for every new task through zero/few-shot learning. Therefore, we used the
existing SOTA results achieved by the fine-tuning approaches to quantify the benefits and challenges of
LLMs in BioNLP applications.
Large language models
Representative LLMs and their versions. Both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 have been regularly updated. For
reproducibility, we used the snapshots gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613 and gpt-4-0613 for extractive tasks, and
gpt-4-32k-0613 for generative tasks, considering their input and output token sizes. Regarding LLaMA 2,
it is available in 7B, 13B, and 70B versions. We evaluated LLaMA 2 13B based on the computational
resources required for fine-tuning, which is arguably the most common scenario applicable to BioNLP
downstream applications. For PMC LLaMA, both 7B and 13B versions are available. Similarly, we used
PMC LLaMA 13B, specifically evaluating it under the fine-tuning setting – the same setting used in its
original study [34]. In the original study, PMC LLaMA was only evaluated on medical question answering
tasks, combining multiple question answering datasets for fine-tuning. In our case, we fine-tuned each
dataset separately and reported the results individually.
Prompts. To date, prompt design remains an open research problem [72-74]. We developed a prompt
template that can be used across different tasks based on existing literature [73-76]. An annotated
prompt example is provided in Supplementary Information S1 Prompt engineering, and we have made
all the prompts publicly available in the repository. The prompt template contains (1) task descriptions
(e.g., classifying relations), (2) input specifications (e.g., a sentence with labeled entities), (3) output
specifications (e.g., the relation type), (4) task guidance (e.g., detailed descriptions or documentations
on relation types), and (5) example demonstrations if examples from training sets are provided. This
approach aligns with previous studies in the biomedical domain, which have demonstrated that
incorporating task guidance into the prompt leads to improved performance [73, 75] and was also

[PAGE 15]

employed and evaluated in our previous study, specifically focusing on named entity recognition [76].
We also adapted the SOTA example selection approach in the biomedical domain described below [27].
Zero-shot and static few-shot. We comparatively evaluated the zero-shot, one-shot, and five-shot
learning performance. Only a few studies have made the selected examples available. For reproducibility
and benchmarking, we first randomly selected the required number of examples in training sets, used
the same selected examples for few-shot learning, and made the selected examples publicly available.
Dynamic K-nearest few-shot. In addition to zero- or static few-shot learning where fixed instructions are
used for each instance, we further evaluated the LLMs under a dynamic few-shot learning setting. The
dynamic few-shot learning is based on the MedPrompt approach, the SOTA method that demonstrated
robust performance in medical question answering tasks without fine-tuning [27]. The essence is to use
K training instances that are most similar to the test instance as the selected examples. We denote this
setting as dynamic K-nearest few-shot, as the prompts for different test instances differ. Specifically, for
each dataset, we used the SOTA text embedding model text-embedding-ada-002 [77] to encode the
instances and used cosine similarity as the metric for finding similar training instances to a testing
instance. We tested dynamic K-nearest few-shot prompts with K equals to one, two, and five.
Parameters for prompt engineering. For zero-, one-, and few-shot approaches, we used a temperature
parameter of 0 to minimize variance for both GPT and LLaMA-based models. Additionally, for LLaMA
models, we maintained other parameters unchanged, set the maximum number of generated tokens
per task, and truncated the instances due to the input length limit for the five-shot setting. Further
details are provided in Supplementary Information S1 Prompt engineering, and the related codes are
available in the repository.
Fine-tuning. We further conducted instruction fine-tuning on LLaMA 2 13B and PMC-LLaMA 13B. For
each dataset, we fine-tuned LLaMA 2 13B and PMC- LLaMA 13B using its training set. The goal of
instruction fine-tuning is defined by the objective function: 𝑎𝑟𝑔 max
𝜃
∑ 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝(𝑦𝑖|𝑥𝑖; 𝜃)(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖)𝜖(𝑋,𝑌) , where
𝑥𝑖 represents the input instruction, 𝑦𝑖 is the ground truth response, and 𝜃 is the parameter set of the
model. This function aims to maximize the likelihood of accurately predicting responses based on the
given instructions. The fine-tuning is performed on eight H100 80G GPUs, over three epochs with a
learning rate of 1e−5, a weight decay of 1e−5, a warmup ratio of 0.01, and Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
for parameter-effective tuning [78].
Output parsing. For extractive and classification tasks, we extracted the targeted predictions (e.g.,
classification types or multiple-choice options) from the raw outputs of LLMs with a combination of
manual and automatic processing. We manually reviewed the processed outputs. Manual review
showed that LLMs provided answers in inconsistent formats in some cases. For example, when
presenting multiple-choice option C, the raw output examples included variations such as: “Based on the
information provided, the most likely … is C. The thyroid gland is a common site for metastasis, and …”,
“Great! Let’s go through the options. A. … B. …Therefore, the most likely diagnosis is C.”, and “I’m happy
to help! Based on the patient’s symptoms and examination findings, … Therefore, option A is
incorrect. …, so option D is incorrect. The correct answer is option C.” (adapted from real responses with
unnecessary details omitted). In such cases, automatic processing might overlook the answer,
potentially lowering LLM accuracy. Thus, we manually extracted outputs in these instances to ensure fair

[PAGE 16]

credit. Additionally, we qualitatively evaluated the prevalence of such cases (providing responses in
inconsistent formats), which will be introduced below.
Evaluations
Quantitative evaluations. We summarized the evaluation metrics in Table 2 under zero-shot, static fewshot, dynamic K-nearest few-shot, and fine-tuning settings. The metrics are applicable to the entire
testing sets of 12 datasets. We further conducted bootstrapping using a subsample size of 30 and
repeated 100 times at a 95% confidence interval to report performance variance and performed a twotailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test using SciPy [79]. Further details are provided in Supplementary
Information S2 Quantitative evaluation results (S2.1. Result reporting).
Qualitative evaluations on inconsistency, missing information, and hallucinations. For the tasks where
the gold standard is fixed, e.g., a classification type or multiple-choice option, we conducted qualitative
evaluations on collectively hundreds of thousands of raw outputs of the LLMs (the raw outputs from
three LLMs under zero- and one-shot conditions across three benchmarks) to categorize errors beyond
inaccurate predictions. Specifically, we examined (1) inconsistent responses, where the responses are in
different formats, (2) missingness, where the responses are missing, and (3) hallucinations, where LLMs
fail to address the prompt and may contain repetitions and misinformation in the output [36]. We
evaluated and reported the results in selected datasets: ChemProt, HoC, and MedQA.
Qualitative evaluations on accuracy, completeness, and readability. For the tasks with free-text gold
standards, such as summaries, we conducted qualitative evaluations on the quality of generated text.
Specifically, one senior resident and one junior resident evaluated four models: the fine-tuned BART
model reported in the SOTA approach, GPT-3.5 zero-shot, GPT-4 zero-shot, and LLaMA 2 13B zero-shot
on 50 random samples from the PubMed Text Summarization benchmark. Each annotator was provided
with 600 annotations. To mitigate potential bias, the model outputs were all lowercased, their orders
were randomly shuffled, and the annotators were unaware of the models being evaluated. They
assessed three dimensions on a scale of 1—5: (1) accuracy, does the generated text contain correct
information from the original input, (2) completeness, does the generated text capture the key
information from the original input, and (3) readability, is the generated text easy to read. The detailed
evaluation guideline is provided in Supplementary Information S3 Qualitative evaluation on the PubMed
Text Summarization Benchmark.
Cost analysis. We further conducted a cost analysis to quantify the trade-off between cost and accuracy
when using GPT models. The cost of GPT models is determined by the number of input and output
tokens. We tracked the tokens in the input prompts and output completions using the official model
tokenizers provided by OpenAI
(https://cookbook.openai.com/examples/how_to_count_tokens_with_tiktoken) and used the pricing
table (https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/pricing/details/cognitive-services/openai-service/) to compute
the overall cost.
Data Availability
All data supporting the findings of this study, including source data, are available in the article and
Supplementary Information, and can be accessed publicly via https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14025500

[PAGE 17]

[37]. Additional data or requests for data can also be obtained from the corresponding authors upon
request.
Code Availability
The codes are publicly available via https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14025500 [37].

[PAGE 18]

References

[1] E. W. Sayers, E. E. Bolton, J. R. Brister, K. Canese, J. Chan, D. C. Comeau, C. M. Farrell, M.
Feldgarden, A. M. Fine, and K. Funk, “Database resources of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information in 2023,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 51, no. D1, pp. D29-D38, 2023.
[2] Q. Chen, A. Allot, R. Leaman, C.-H. Wei, E. Aghaarabi, J. J. Guerrerio, L. Xu, and Z. Lu, “LitCovid in
2022: an information resource for the COVID-19 literature,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 51, no.
D1, pp. D1512-D1518, 2023.
[3] R. Leaman, R. Islamaj, A. Allot, Q. Chen, W. J. Wilbur, and Z. Lu, “Comprehensively identifying
long Covid articles with human-in-the-loop machine learning,” Patterns, vol. 4, no. 1, 2023.
[4] Q. Chen, K. Lee, S. Yan, S. Kim, C.-H. Wei, and Z. Lu, “BioConceptVec: creating and evaluating
literature-based biomedical concept embeddings on a large scale,” PLoS computational biology,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. e1007617, 2020.
[5] C. Blake, “Beyond genes, proteins, and abstracts: Identifying scientific claims from full-text
biomedical articles,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 173-189, 2010.
[6] Y. Su, M. Wang, P. Wang, C. Zheng, Y. Liu, and X. Zeng, “Deep learning joint models for
extracting entities and relations in biomedical: a survey and comparison,” Briefings in
Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 6, 2022.
[7] Y. Zhang, Q. Chen, Z. Yang, H. Lin, and Z. Lu, “BioWordVec, improving biomedical word
embeddings with subword information and MeSH,” Scientific data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1-9, 2019.
[8] Q. Chen, Y. Peng, and Z. Lu, "BioSentVec: creating sentence embeddings for biomedical texts."
pp. 1-5.
[9] J. Lee, W. Yoon, S. Kim, D. Kim, S. Kim, C. H. So, and J. Kang, “BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical
language representation model for biomedical text mining,” Bioinformatics, vol. 36, no. 4, pp.
1234-1240, 2020.
[10] Y. Peng, S. Yan, and Z. Lu, “Transfer learning in biomedical natural language processing: an
evaluation of BERT and ELMo on ten benchmarking datasets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05474,
2019.
[11] L. Fang, Q. Chen, C.-H. Wei, Z. Lu, and K. Wang, “Bioformer: an efficient transformer language
model for biomedical text mining,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01588, 2023.
[12] R. Luo, L. Sun, Y. Xia, T. Qin, S. Zhang, H. Poon, and T.-Y. Liu, “BioGPT: generative pre-trained
transformer for biomedical text generation and mining,” Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no.
6, 2022.
[13] A. Venigalla, J. Frankle, and M. Carbin, “Biomedlm: a domain-specific large language model for
biomedical text,” MosaicML. Accessed: Dec, vol. 23, 2022.
[14] H. Yuan, Z. Yuan, R. Gan, J. Zhang, Y. Xie, and S. Yu, “BioBART: Pretraining and evaluation of a
biomedical generative language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03905, 2022.
[15] L. N. Phan, J. T. Anibal, H. Tran, S. Chanana, E. Bahadroglu, A. Peltekian, and G. Altan-Bonnet,
“Scifive: a text-to-text transformer model for biomedical literature,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.03598, 2021.
[16] Y. Gu, R. Tinn, H. Cheng, M. Lucas, N. Usuyama, X. Liu, T. Naumann, J. Gao, and H. Poon,
“Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical natural language processing,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.15779, 2020.
[17] A. Allot, Q. Chen, S. Kim, R. Vera Alvarez, D. C. Comeau, W. J. Wilbur, and Z. Lu, “LitSense:
making sense of biomedical literature at sentence level,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 47, no. W1,
pp. W594-W599, 2019.

[PAGE 19]

[18] W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Min, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, and Z. Dong, “A
survey of large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
[19] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama,
and A. Ray, “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 27730-27744, 2022.
[20] X. Chen, J. Ye, C. Zu, N. Xu, R. Zheng, M. Peng, J. Zhou, T. Gui, Q. Zhang, and X. Huang, “How
Robust is GPT-3.5 to Predecessors? A Comprehensive Study on Language Understanding Tasks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00293, 2023.
[21] OpenAI, “GPT-4 Technical Report,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2303.08774, 2023.
[22] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P.
Bhargava, and S. Bhosale, “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[23] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Roux, A. Mensch, B. Savary, C. Bamford, D. S. Chaplot, D. d. l.
Casas, E. B. Hanna, and F. Bressand, “Mixtral of experts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
[24] P. Lee, C. Goldberg, and I. Kohane, The AI revolution in medicine: GPT-4 and beyond: Pearson,
2023.
[25] C. Wong, S. Zhang, Y. Gu, C. Moung, J. Abel, N. Usuyama, R. Weerasinghe, B. Piening, T.
Naumann, and C. Bifulco, "Scaling clinical trial matching using large language models: A case
study in oncology." pp. 846-862.
[26] Q. Liu, S. Hyland, S. Bannur, K. Bouzid, D. C. Castro, M. T. Wetscherek, R. Tinn, H. Sharma, F.
Pérez-García, and A. Schwaighofer, “Exploring the Boundaries of GPT-4 in Radiology,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.14573, 2023.
[27] H. Nori, Y. T. Lee, S. Zhang, D. Carignan, R. Edgar, N. Fusi, N. King, J. Larson, Y. Li, and W. Liu,
“Can generalist foundation models outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in
medicine,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16452, 2023.
[28] S. Tian, Q. Jin, L. Yeganova, P.-T. Lai, Q. Zhu, X. Chen, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, W. Kim, and D. C.
Comeau, “Opportunities and challenges for ChatGPT and large language models in biomedicine
and health,” Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. bbad493, 2024.
[29] K. He, R. Mao, Q. Lin, Y. Ruan, X. Lan, M. Feng, and E. Cambria, “A survey of large language
models for healthcare: from data, technology, and applications to accountability and ethics,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05694, 2023.
[30] J. A. Omiye, H. Gui, S. J. Rezaei, J. Zou, and R. Daneshjou, “Large language models in medicine:
the potentials and pitfalls: a narrative review,” Annals of Internal Medicine, vol. 177, no. 2, pp.
210-220, 2024.
[31] G. Soğancıoğlu, H. Öztürk, and A. Özgür, “BIOSSES: a semantic sentence similarity estimation
system for the biomedical domain,” Bioinformatics, vol. 33, no. 14, pp. i49-i58, 2017.
[32] R. Tinn, H. Cheng, Y. Gu, N. Usuyama, X. Liu, T. Naumann, J. Gao, and H. Poon, “Fine-tuning large
neural language models for biomedical natural language processing,” Patterns, vol. 4, no. 4,
2023.
[33] Q. Chen, A. Rankine, Y. Peng, E. Aghaarabi, and Z. Lu, “Benchmarking effectiveness and
efficiency of deep learning models for semantic textual similarity in the clinical domain:
validation study,” JMIR Medical Informatics, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. e27386, 2021.
[34] C. Wu, W. Lin, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. Xie, and Y. Wang, “PMC-LLaMA: toward building opensource language models for medicine,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
pp. ocae045, 2024.
[35] S. L. Fleming, A. Lozano, W. J. Haberkorn, J. A. Jindal, E. P. Reis, R. Thapa, L. Blankemeier, J. Z.
Genkins, E. Steinberg, and A. Nayak, “MedAlign: A Clinician-Generated Dataset for Instruction
Following with Electronic Medical Records,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14089, 2023.

[PAGE 20]

[36] Y. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Cui, D. Cai, L. Liu, T. Fu, X. Huang, E. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and Y. Chen, “Siren's song
in the AI ocean: a survey on hallucination in large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.01219, 2023.
[37] Q. Chen, Hu, Y., Peng, X., Xie, Q., Jin, Q., Gilson, A., Singer, M., Ai, X., Lai, P.-T., Wang, Z., Keloth,
V., Raja, K., Huang, J., He, H., Lin, F., Du, J., Zhang, R., Zheng, W. J., Adelman, R. A., Lu, Z., Xu, H.
"A systematic evaluation of large language models for biomedical natural language processing:
benchmarks, baselines, and recommendations," https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14025500,
2024.
[38] H. Nori, N. King, S. M. McKinney, D. Carignan, and E. Horvitz, “Capabilities of gpt-4 on medical
challenge problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13375, 2023.
[39] Y. Labrak, M. Rouvier, and R. Dufour, “A zero-shot and few-shot study of instruction-finetuned
large language models applied to clinical and biomedical tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12114,
2023.
[40] H. Jin, X. Han, J. Yang, Z. Jiang, Z. Liu, C.-Y. Chang, H. Chen, and X. Hu, “Llm maybe longlm: Selfextend llm context window without tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01325, 2024.
[41] Y. Ding, L. L. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Xu, N. Shang, J. Xu, F. Yang, and M. Yang, “LongRoPE: Extending
LLM Context Window Beyond 2 Million Tokens,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13753, 2024.
[42] Q. Xie, J. Huang, T. Saha, and S. Ananiadou, “Gretel: Graph contrastive topic enhanced language
model for long document extractive summarization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09982, 2022.
[43] B. J. Gutierrez, N. McNeal, C. Washington, Y. Chen, L. Li, H. Sun, and Y. Su, “Thinking about gpt-3
in-context learning for biomedical ie? think again,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08410, 2022.
[44] H. Rehana, N. B. Çam, M. Basmaci, Y. He, A. Özgür, and J. Hur, “Evaluation of GPT and BERTbased models on identifying protein-protein interactions in biomedical text,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.17728, 2023.
[45] Q. Jin, Z. Yuan, G. Xiong, Q. Yu, H. Ying, C. Tan, M. Chen, S. Huang, X. Liu, and S. Yu, “Biomedical
question answering: a survey of approaches and challenges,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 1-36, 2022.
[46] K. Singhal, S. Azizi, T. Tu, S. S. Mahdavi, J. Wei, H. W. Chung, N. Scales, A. Tanwani, H. Cole-Lewis,
and S. Pfohl, “Large language models encode clinical knowledge,” Nature, pp. 1-9, 2023.
[47] Y. Chang, X. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Wu, L. Yang, K. Zhu, H. Chen, X. Yi, C. Wang, and Y. Wang, “A
survey on evaluation of large language models,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology, 2023.
[48] S. Minaee, T. Mikolov, N. Nikzad, M. Chenaghlu, R. Socher, X. Amatriain, and J. Gao, “Large
language models: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06196, 2024.
[49] Z. Chen, A. H. Cano, A. Romanou, A. Bonnet, K. Matoba, F. Salvi, M. Pagliardini, S. Fan, A. Köpf,
and A. Mohtashami, “Meditron-70b: Scaling medical pretraining for large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16079, 2023.
[50] J. DeYoung, I. Beltagy, M. van Zuylen, B. Kuehl, and L. L. Wang, “Ms2: Multi-document
summarization of medical studies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06486, 2021.
[51] M. Wornow, Y. Xu, R. Thapa, B. Patel, E. Steinberg, S. Fleming, M. A. Pfeffer, J. Fries, and N. H.
Shah, “The shaky foundations of large language models and foundation models for electronic
health records,” npj Digital Medicine, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 135, 2023.
[52] J. Manyika, and S. Hsiao, “An overview of Bard: an early experiment with generative AI,” AI.
Google Static Documents, vol. 2, 2023.
[53] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Mensch, C. Bamford, D. S. Chaplot, D. d. l. Casas, F. Bressand, G.
Lengyel, G. Lample, and L. Saulnier, “Mistral 7B,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.

[PAGE 21]

[54] M. Krallinger, O. Rabal, S. A. Akhondi, M. P. Pérez, J. Santamaría, G. P. Rodríguez, G. Tsatsaronis,
A. Intxaurrondo, J. A. López, and U. Nandal, "Overview of the BioCreative VI chemical-protein
interaction Track." pp. 141-146.
[55] Q. Chen, A. Allot, R. Leaman, R. Islamaj, J. Du, L. Fang, K. Wang, S. Xu, Y. Zhang, and P.
Bagherzadeh, “Multi-label classification for biomedical literature: an overview of the BioCreative
VII LitCovid Track for COVID-19 literature topic annotations,” Database, vol. 2022, 2022.
[56] R. Islamaj Doğan, S. Kim, A. Chatr-Aryamontri, C.-H. Wei, D. C. Comeau, R. Antunes, S. Matos, Q.
Chen, A. Elangovan, and N. C. Panyam, “Overview of the BioCreative VI Precision Medicine
Track: mining protein interactions and mutations for precision medicine,” Database, vol. 2019,
2019.
[57] International Society for Biocuration, “Biocuration: Distilling data into knowledge,” Plos Biology,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. e2002846, 2018.
[58] J. Li, Y. Sun, R. J. Johnson, D. Sciaky, C.-H. Wei, R. Leaman, A. P. Davis, C. J. Mattingly, T. C.
Wiegers, and Z. Lu, “BioCreative V CDR task corpus: a resource for chemical disease relation
extraction,” Database, vol. 2016, 2016.
[59] R. I. Doğan, R. Leaman, and Z. Lu, “NCBI disease corpus: a resource for disease name recognition
and concept normalization,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 47, pp. 1-10, 2014.
[60] X. Li, J. F. Rousseau, Y. Ding, M. Song, and W. Lu, “Understanding drug repurposing from the
perspective of biomedical entities and their evolution: Bibliographic research using aspirin,”
JMIR Medical Informatics, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. e16739, 2020.
[61] I. Segura-Bedmar, P. Martínez Fernández, and M. Herrero Zazo, "Semeval-2013 task 9:
Extraction of drug-drug interactions from biomedical texts (ddiextraction 2013)."
[62] J. Du, Q. Chen, Y. Peng, Y. Xiang, C. Tao, and Z. Lu, “ML-Net: multi-label classification of
biomedical texts with deep neural networks,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1279-1285, 2019.
[63] S. Baker, I. Silins, Y. Guo, I. Ali, J. Högberg, U. Stenius, and A. Korhonen, “Automatic semantic
classification of scientific literature according to the hallmarks of cancer,” Bioinformatics, vol.
32, no. 3, pp. 432-440, 2016.
[64] Z. Kaddari, Y. Mellah, J. Berrich, T. Bouchentouf, and M. G. Belkasmi, "Biomedical question
answering: A survey of methods and datasets." pp. 1-8.
[65] D. Jin, E. Pan, N. Oufattole, W.-H. Weng, H. Fang, and P. Szolovits, “What disease does this
patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical exams,”
Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 14, pp. 6421, 2021.
[66] Q. Jin, B. Dhingra, Z. Liu, W. W. Cohen, and X. Lu, “Pubmedqa: A dataset for biomedical research
question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06146, 2019.
[67] A. Cohan, F. Dernoncourt, D. S. Kim, T. Bui, S. Kim, W. Chang, and N. Goharian, “A discourseaware attention model for abstractive summarization of long documents,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.05685, 2018.
[68] A. Devaraj, B. C. Wallace, I. J. Marshall, and J. J. Li, "Paragraph-level simplification of medical
texts." p. 4972.
[69] Z. Luo, Q. Xie, and S. Ananiadou, “Readability controllable biomedical document
summarization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04705, 2022.
[70] T. Goldsack, Z. Luo, Q. Xie, C. Scarton, M. Shardlow, S. Ananiadou, and C. Lin, “Overview of the
biolaysumm 2023 shared task on lay summarization of biomedical research articles,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.17332, 2023.
[71] M. Lewis, Y. Liu, N. Goyal, M. Ghazvininejad, A. Mohamed, O. Levy, V. Stoyanov, and L.
Zettlemoyer, “Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language
generation, translation, and comprehension,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13461, 2019.

[PAGE 22]

[72] P. Liu, W. Yuan, J. Fu, Z. Jiang, H. Hayashi, and G. Neubig, “Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A
systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language processing,” ACM Computing
Surveys, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1-35, 2023.
[73] Y. Hu, Q. Chen, J. Du, X. Peng, V. K. Keloth, X. Zuo, Y. Zhou, Z. Li, X. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “Improving
large language models for clinical named entity recognition via prompt engineering,” Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association, pp. ocad259, 2024.
[74] L. Wang, W. Bi, S. Zhao, Y. Ma, L. Lv, C. Meng, J. Fu, and H. Lv, “Investigating the Impact of
Prompt Engineering on the Performance of Large Language Models for Standardizing Obstetric
Diagnosis Text: Comparative Study,” JMIR Formative Research, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. e53216, 2024.
[75] M. Agrawal, S. Hegselmann, H. Lang, Y. Kim, and D. Sontag, "Large language models are few-shot
clinical information extractors." pp. 1998-2022.
[76] V. K. Keloth, Y. Hu, Q. Xie, X. Peng, Y. Wang, A. Zheng, M. Selek, K. Raja, C. H. Wei, and Q. Jin,
“Advancing entity recognition in biomedicine via instruction tuning of large language models,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. btae163, 2024.
[77] A. Neelakantan, T. Xu, R. Puri, A. Radford, J. M. Han, J. Tworek, Q. Yuan, N. Tezak, J. W. Kim, and
C. Hallacy, “Text and code embeddings by contrastive pre-training,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.10005, 2022.
[78] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, and W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank
adaptation of large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
[79] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P.
Peterson, W. Weckesser, and J. Bright, “SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific
computing in Python,” Nature methods, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 261-272, 2020.
[80] E. Lehman, E. Hernandez, D. Mahajan, J. Wulff, M. J. Smith, Z. Ziegler, D. Nadler, P. Szolovits, A.
Johnson, and E. Alsentzer, “Do We Still Need Clinical Language Models?,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.08091, 2023.
[81] S. Chen, Y. Li, S. Lu, H. Van, H. J. Aerts, G. K. Savova, and D. S. Bitterman, “Evaluating the
ChatGPT family of models for biomedical reasoning and classification,” Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, pp. ocad256, 2024.
[82] Q. Chen, H. Sun, H. Liu, Y. Jiang, T. Ran, X. Jin, X. Xiao, Z. Lin, Z. Niu, and H. Chen, “A
Comprehensive Benchmark Study on Biomedical Text Generation and Mining with ChatGPT,”
bioRxiv, pp. 2023.04. 19.537463, 2023.
[83] C.-H. Wei, Y. Peng, R. Leaman, A. P. Davis, C. J. Mattingly, J. Li, T. C. Wiegers, and Z. Lu,
“Assessing the state of the art in biomedical relation extraction: overview of the BioCreative V
chemical-disease relation (CDR) task,” Database, vol. 2016, pp. baw032, 2016.
[84] J. He, F. Li, J. Li, X. Hu, Y. Nian, Y. Xiang, J. Wang, Q. Wei, Y. Li, and H. Xu, “Prompt Tuning in
Biomedical Relation Extraction,” Journal of Healthcare Informatics Research, pp. 1-19, 2024.
[85] D. Mingliang, T. Jijun, and G. Fei, "Document-level DDI relation extraction with document-entity
embedding." pp. 392-397.
[86] Q. Chen, J. Du, A. Allot, and Z. Lu, “LitMC-BERT: transformer-based multi-label classification of
biomedical literature with an application on COVID-19 literature curation,” IEEE/ACM
transactions on computational biology and bioinformatics.
[87] Z. Guo, P. Wang, Y. Wang, and S. Yu, “Improving small language models on PubMedQA via
Generative Data Augmentation,” arXiv, Jul, vol. 12, 2023.
[88] H. Y. Koh, J. Ju, M. Liu, and S. Pan, “An empirical survey on long document summarization:
Datasets, models, and metrics,” ACM computing surveys, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1-35, 2022.
[89] J. A. Bishop, Q. Xie, and S. Ananiadou, “LongDocFACTScore: Evaluating the factuality of long
document abstractive summarisation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12455, 2023.

[PAGE 23]

[90] L. L. Wang, J. DeYoung, and B. Wallace, "Overview of MSLR2022: A shared task on multidocument summarization for literature reviews."
[91] B. Ondov, K. Attal, and D. Demner-Fushman, “A survey of automated methods for biomedical
text simplification,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 29, no. 11, pp.
1976-1988, 2022.
[92] J. Stricker, A. Chasiotis, M. Kerwer, and A. Günther, “Scientific abstracts and plain language
summaries in psychology: A comparison based on readability indices,” PLoS One, vol. 15, no. 4,
pp. e0231160, 2020.
[93] S. Zhang, H. Cheng, J. Gao, and H. Poon, “Optimizing bi-encoder for named entity recognition via
contrastive learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.14565, 2022.
[94] J. He, F. Li, X. Hu, J. Li, Y. Nian, J. Wang, Y. Xiang, Q. Wei, H. Xu, and C. Tao, "Chemical-protein
relation extraction with pre-trained prompt tuning." pp. 608-609.
[95] M. Yasunaga, A. Bosselut, H. Ren, X. Zhang, C. D. Manning, P. S. Liang, and J. Leskovec, “Deep
bidirectional language-knowledge graph pretraining,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 37309-37323, 2022.
[96] L. J. Y. Flores, H. Huang, K. Shi, S. Chheang, and A. Cohan, “Medical Text Simplification:
Optimizing for Readability with Unlikelihood Training and Reranked Beam Search Decoding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11191, 2023.

Acknowledgments
This study is supported by the following National Institutes of Health grants: 1R01LM014604 (Q.C.,
R.A.A., and H.X), 4R00LM014024 (Q.C.), R01AG078154 (R.Z., and H.X), 1R01AG066749 (W.J.Z),
W81XWH-22-1-0164 (W.J.Z), and the Intramural Research Program of the National Library of Medicine
(Q.C., Q.J., P.L., Z.W., and Z.L).

Author Contributions Statement
Q.C., Z.L., and H.X. designed the research. Q.C., Y.H., X.P., Q.X., Q.J., A.G., M.B.S., X.A., P.L., Z.W., V.K.K.,
K.P., J.H., H.H., F.L., and J.D. performed experiments and data analysis. Q.C., Z.L., and H.X. wrote and
edited the manuscript. All authors contributed to discussion and manuscript preparation.

Competing Interests Statement
Dr. Jingcheng Du and Dr. Hua Xu have research-related financial interests at Melax Technologies Inc. The
remaining authors declare no competing interests.

Tables
Table 1. A comparison of key elements from representative studies assessing large language models (LLMs) in the biomedical
and clinical domains as of March 2024. The table categorizes each study by its domain of focus (Biomedical or Clinical), the
models evaluated, the evaluation scope including extractive tasks such as named entity recognition (NER) and generative tasks

[PAGE 24]

such as text summarization, the evaluation measures including quantitative evaluation metrics (such as the F1-score),
qualitative evaluation metrics (such as the completeness in a scale of 1—5), and the accessibility of data, prompts, and codes to
the public. 1Extractive or classification: the tasks where the gold standard is fixed, e.g., relation extraction. 2Generative: text
summarization and text simplification tasks where the gold standard is free-text. 3Fine-tuning: an LLM is further tuned on
specific datasets. 4Qualitative: tasks such as manual validations on the quality of LLM generated text.
Study Domain Model Tasks
Evaluation scope1 Evaluation setting Evaluation measures Availability
Extractive/
Classification Generative
Zero/
Fewshot
Finetuning3 Quantitative Qualitative4 Cost
analysis

[80] Clinical T5,
GPT-3
Clinical language
inference,
Radiology question
answering,
Discharge summary
classification
Y N Y N Y N N Y
[75] Clinical GPT-3
Clinical sense
disambiguation,
Biomedical
evidence extraction,
Coreference
resolution,
Medication status
extraction,
Medication
attribute extraction
Y N Y N Y N N N
[43] Biomedical BERT,
GPT-3
Named entity
recognition,
Relation extraction,
Y N Y N Y N N Y
[44] Biomedical BERT,
GPT-3.5 Relation extraction Y N Y N Y N N N
[27] Biomedical
MedPaLM,
GPT-4
Question answering N Y Y N Y Y N N
[81] Biomedical
BERT,
GPT-3.5,
GPT-4
Biomedical
reasoning,
Document
classification
Y N Y N Y N N N
[82] Biomedical BERT,
GPT-3.5
Named entity
recognition,
Relation extraction,
Document
classification,
Question answering
Y N Y N Y N N N
Ours Biomedical
BERT,
BART,
LLaMA 2,
PMC
LLaMA,
GPT-3.5,
GPT-4
Named entity
recognition,
Relation extraction,
Document
classification,
Question
answering,
Text summarization,
Text simplification
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y

Table 2. Evaluation datasets, dataset size, and evaluation metrics. The related studies using the metrics are also provided. 1We
filtered the noisy instances with less than 50 words for the training and validation sets and kept the testing set untouched. 2The
gold standard of the testing set of MS^2 is not publicly available; we used the validation set instead.
Training Validation Testing Primary metrics Secondary metrics
Named entity recognition
BC5CDR-chemical [58] 4,560 4,581 4,797 Entity-level F1 [58, 83]
NCBI-disease [59] 5,424 923 940 Entity-level F1 [16, 59]
Relation extraction
ChemProt [54] 19,460 11,820 16,943 Macro F1 [84] Micro F1 [54, 84]
DDI2013 [61] 18,779 7,244 5,761 Macro F1 [61, 85] Micro F1 [16]
Multi-label document classification
HoC [63] 1,108 157 315 Macro F1 [63, 86] Micro F1 [86]
LitCovid [55] 24,960 6,239 2,500 Macro F1 [55] Micro F1 [55]
Question answering
MedQA 5-option [65] 10,178 1,272 1,273 Accuracy [65] Macro F1 [87]
PubMedQA [66] 190,142 21,127 500 Accuracy [66] Macro F1 [87]
Text summarization
PubMed Text Summarization1[67] 117,108 6,631 6,658 Rouge-L [67] BERT Score [88], BART Score [89]

[TABLE page=24 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Evaluation scope1 | Evaluation setting | Evaluation measures | Unnamed: 4 | Availability
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Study | Unnamed: 1: Domain | Unnamed: 2: Model | Unnamed: 3: Tasks | Evaluation scope1: Extractive/ | Evaluation setting: Zero/ Fine- | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: Cost | Availability:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: Generative | Evaluation setting: Few- | Evaluation measures: Quantitative Qualitative4 | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: Classification | Evaluation setting: tuning3 | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: analysis | Availability:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: shot | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Clinical language | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: inference, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: T5, | Unnamed: 3: Radiology question | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: [80] | Unnamed: 1: Clinical | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: Y N | Evaluation setting: Y N | Evaluation measures: Y N | Unnamed: 4: N | Availability: Y
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3 | Unnamed: 3: answering, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Discharge summary | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: classification | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Clinical sense | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: disambiguation, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Biomedical | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: evidence extraction, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Coreference | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: [75] | Unnamed: 1: Clinical | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3 | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: Y N | Evaluation setting: Y N | Evaluation measures: Y N | Unnamed: 4: N | Availability: N
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: resolution, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Medication status | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: extraction, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Medication | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: attribute extraction | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Named entity | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: BERT, | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: [43] | Unnamed: 1: Biomedical | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: recognition, | Evaluation scope1: Y N | Evaluation setting: Y N | Evaluation measures: Y N | Unnamed: 4: N | Availability: Y
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3 | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Relation extraction, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: BERT, | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: [44] | Unnamed: 1: Biomedical | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Relation extraction | Evaluation scope1: Y N | Evaluation setting: Y N | Evaluation measures: Y N | Unnamed: 4: N | Availability: N
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3.5 | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: Med- | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: [27] | Unnamed: 1: Biomedical | Unnamed: 2: PaLM, | Unnamed: 3: Question answering | Evaluation scope1: N Y | Evaluation setting: Y N | Evaluation measures: Y Y | Unnamed: 4: N | Availability: N
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-4 | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Biomedical | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: BERT, | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: reasoning, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 37: Unnamed: 0: [81] | Unnamed: 1: Biomedical | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3.5, | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: Y N | Evaluation setting: Y N | Evaluation measures: Y N | Unnamed: 4: N | Availability: N
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Document | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-4 | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: classification | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 41: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Named entity | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 42: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: recognition, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 43: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: BERT, | Unnamed: 3: Relation extraction, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 44: Unnamed: 0: [82] | Unnamed: 1: Biomedical | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Evaluation scope1: Y N | Evaluation setting: Y N | Evaluation measures: Y N | Unnamed: 4: N | Availability: N
Row 45: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3.5 | Unnamed: 3: Document | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 46: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: classification, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 47: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Question answering | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 48: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Named entity | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 49: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: BERT, | Unnamed: 3: recognition, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 50: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: BART, | Unnamed: 3: Relation extraction, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 51: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: LLaMA 2, | Unnamed: 3: Document | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 52: Unnamed: 0: Ours | Unnamed: 1: Biomedical | Unnamed: 2: PMC | Unnamed: 3: classification, | Evaluation scope1: Y Y | Evaluation setting: Y Y | Evaluation measures: Y Y | Unnamed: 4: Y | Availability: Y
Row 53: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: LLaMA, | Unnamed: 3: Question | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 54: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3.5, | Unnamed: 3: answering, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 55: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-4 | Unnamed: 3: Text summarization, | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
Row 56: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Text simplification | Evaluation scope1: | Evaluation setting: | Evaluation measures: | Unnamed: 4: | Availability:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=24 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Training | Validation | Testing | Primary metrics | Secondary metrics
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Named entity recognition | Training: | Validation: | Testing: | Primary metrics: | Secondary metrics:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: BC5CDR-chemical [58] | Training: 4,560 | Validation: 4,581 | Testing: 4,797 | Primary metrics: Entity-level F1 [58, 83] | Secondary metrics:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: NCBI-disease [59] | Training: 5,424 | Validation: 923 | Testing: 940 | Primary metrics: Entity-level F1 [16, 59] | Secondary metrics:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Relation extraction | Training: | Validation: | Testing: | Primary metrics: | Secondary metrics:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: ChemProt [54] | Training: 19,460 | Validation: 11,820 | Testing: 16,943 | Primary metrics: Macro F1 [84] | Secondary metrics: Micro F1 [54, 84]
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: DDI2013 [61] | Training: 18,779 | Validation: 7,244 | Testing: 5,761 | Primary metrics: Macro F1 [61, 85] | Secondary metrics: Micro F1 [16]
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: Multi-label document classification | Training: | Validation: | Testing: | Primary metrics: | Secondary metrics:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: HoC [63] | Training: 1,108 | Validation: 157 | Testing: 315 | Primary metrics: Macro F1 [63, 86] | Secondary metrics: Micro F1 [86]
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: LitCovid [55] | Training: 24,960 | Validation: 6,239 | Testing: 2,500 | Primary metrics: Macro F1 [55] | Secondary metrics: Micro F1 [55]
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: Question answering | Training: | Validation: | Testing: | Primary metrics: | Secondary metrics:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: MedQA 5-option [65] | Training: 10,178 | Validation: 1,272 | Testing: 1,273 | Primary metrics: Accuracy [65] | Secondary metrics: Macro F1 [87]
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: PubMedQA [66] | Training: 190,142 | Validation: 21,127 | Testing: 500 | Primary metrics: Accuracy [66] | Secondary metrics: Macro F1 [87]
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: Text summarization | Training: | Validation: | Testing: | Primary metrics: | Secondary metrics:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: PubMed Text Summarization1[67] | Training: 117,108 | Validation: 6,631 | Testing: 6,658 | Primary metrics: Rouge-L [67] | Secondary metrics: BERT Score [88], BART Score [89]
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 25]

MS^22[50] 14,188 2,021 - Rouge-L [50] BERT Score [90], BART Score [28]
Text simplification
Cochrane PLS [68] 3,568 411 480 Rouge-L [68] FKGL [91], DCRS [92]
PLOS Text Simplification [69] 26,124 1,000 1,000 Rouge-L [69] FKGL [69], DCRS [69]

Table 3. Quantitative evaluations of the LLMs on the 12 benchmarks under zero/few-shot (including static one- and five-shot) )
and fine-tuned settings. The primary metric results are reported. State-of-the-art (SOTA) results, representing the reported best
performance of studies using fine-tuned (domain-specific) language models before the LLMs and their backbone models, are
also provided. The SOTA results are directly extracted from the studies. 1 the study reported accuracy on MedQA (4-option); we
applied the released model for inference on MedQA (5-option). 2The inputs for LLaMA 2 were truncated for question
answering, text summarization, and text simplification tasks under the five-shot setting due to its input token length limit
detailed in Supplementary Information S1 Prompt engineering. The highest performance under either zero/few-shot or finetuned settings is marked in bold. For instance, GPT-4 one-shot achieved the highest performance under the zero/few-shot
setting, and LLaMA 2 13B fine-tuned achieved the highest performance under the fine-tuned setting in the BC5CDR-chemical
dataset. A two-tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test with bootstrapping, using a subsample size of 30 and 100 repetitions at a 95%
confidence interval, was conducted for both zero/few-shot and fine-tuning settings. An asterisk (*) indicates if the P-value of
the best performance is less than 0.05 for all the models under either the zero/few-shot or fine-tuned settings. Continuing with
the BC5CDR-chemical example, the P-value of GPT-4 one-shot was less than 0.05 for all others under the zero/few-shot setting,
whereas LLaMA 2 13B fine-tuned was not under the fine-tuned setting. Detailed results including performance mean and
variance, statistical test results, dynamic few-shot, and secondary metrics are provided in Supplementary Information S2
Quantitative evaluation results S2.4.

Table 4. Examples of inconsistent, missing, and hallucinated responses. Text in square brackets represents annotated
explanations. Unnecessary detail is omitted due to space constraints.
Type Example
SOTA results
before the LLMs
(Foundation
model)
Zero/Few-shot Fine-tuned
Zero-shot One-shot Five-shot
GPT-3.5 GPT-4 LLaMA
2 13B
GPT-3.5 GPT-4 LLaMA 2
13B
GPT-3.5 GPT-4 LLaMA 2
13B2
LLaMA 2
13B
PMC LLaMA
13B
Named entity recognition
BC5CDRchemical
Entity F1 0.9500 [93]
(PubMedBERT)
0.6274 0.7993 0.3944 0.7133 0.8327* 0.6276 0.7228 0.7979 0.5530 0.9149 0.9063
NCBI Disease Entity F1 0.9090 [93]
(PubMedBERT)
0.4060 0.5827 0.2211 0.4817 0.5988 0.3811 0.4309 0.6389* 0.4847 0.8682* 0.8353
Relation extraction
ChemProt Macro
F1
0.7344 [94]
(BioBERT)
0.1345 0.3250 0.1392 0.1280 0.3391 0.0718 0.1758 0.3756 0.0967 0.4612* 0.3111
DDI2013 Macro
F1
0.7919 [85]
(BioBERT)
0.2004 0.2968 0.1305 0.2126 0.3312 0.1779 0.1706 0.3276 0.1663 0.6218 0.5700
Multi-label document classification
HoC Macro
F1
0.8882 [86]
(BioBERT)
0.6722 0.7109 0.1285 0.6671 0.7093 0.3072 0.6994 0.7099 0.1797 0.6957* 0.4221
LitCovid Macro
F1
0.8921 [86]
(BioBERT)
0.5967 0.5883 0.3825 0.6009 0.5901 0.4808 0.6179 0.6077 0.3305 0.5725* 0.4273
Question answering
MedQA (5Option)
Accuracy 0.41951 [95]
(BioLinkBERT)
0.4988 0.7156 0.2522 0.5161 0.7439 0.2899 0.5208 0.7651* 0.3504 0.4462* 0.3975
PubMedQA Accuracy 0.7340 [95]
(BioLinkBERT)
0.6560 0.6280 0.5520 0.4600 0.7100 0.2660 0.6920 0.7580* 0.6000 0.8040* 0.7680
Text summarization
PubMed Rouge-L 0.4316 [42]
(BART)
0.2274 0.2419 0.1190 0.2351 0.2427 0.0989 0.2423 0.2444 0.1629 0.1857* 0.1684
MS^2 Rouge-L 0.2080 [50]
(BART)
0.0889 0.1224 0.0948 0.1132 0.1248 0.0320 0.1013 0.1218 0.1205 0.0934* 0.0059
Text simplification
Cochrane
PLS
Rouge-L 0.4476 [96]
(BART)
0.2365 0.2375 0.2081 0.2447 0.2385 0.2207 0.2470 0.2469 0.2283 0.2355 0.2370
PLOS Rouge-L 0.4368 [69]
(BART)
0.2323 0.2253 0.2121 0.2449* 0.2386 0.1836 0.2416 0.2409 0.1656 0.2583 0.2577
Macroaverage
0.6536 0.3814 0.4561 0.2362 0.3848 0.4750 0.2614 0.4052 0.4862 0.2866 0.5131 0.4422

[TABLE page=25 index=1]
Columns: SOTA results | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Zero/Few-shot | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | Unnamed: 6 | Fine-tuned
Row 1: SOTA results: before the LLMs | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Zero-shot | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: One-shot | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: Five-shot | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 2: SOTA results: (Foundation | Unnamed: 0: GPT-3.5 | Unnamed: 1: GPT-4 | Unnamed: 2: LLaMA | Zero/Few-shot: GPT-3.5 GPT-4 | Unnamed: 3: LLaMA 2 | Unnamed: 4: GPT-3.5 | Unnamed: 5: GPT-4 | Unnamed: 6: LLaMA 2 | Fine-tuned: LLaMA 2 PMC LLaMA
Row 3: SOTA results: model) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 2 13B | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: 13B | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: 13B2 | Fine-tuned: 13B 13B
Row 4: SOTA results: Named entity recognition | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 5: SOTA results: BC5CDR- Entity F1 0.9500 [93] | Unnamed: 0: 0.6274 | Unnamed: 1: 0.7993 | Unnamed: 2: 0.3944 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.7133 0.8327* | Unnamed: 3: 0.6276 | Unnamed: 4: 0.7228 | Unnamed: 5: 0.7979 | Unnamed: 6: 0.5530 | Fine-tuned: 0.9149 0.9063
Row 6: SOTA results: chemical (PubMedBERT) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 7: SOTA results: NCBI Disease Entity F1 0.9090 [93] | Unnamed: 0: 0.4060 | Unnamed: 1: 0.5827 | Unnamed: 2: 0.2211 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.4817 0.5988 | Unnamed: 3: 0.3811 | Unnamed: 4: 0.4309 | Unnamed: 5: 0.6389* | Unnamed: 6: 0.4847 | Fine-tuned: 0.8682* 0.8353
Row 8: SOTA results: (PubMedBERT) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 9: SOTA results: Relation extraction | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 10: SOTA results: ChemProt Macro 0.7344 [94] | Unnamed: 0: 0.1345 | Unnamed: 1: 0.3250 | Unnamed: 2: 0.1392 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.1280 0.3391 | Unnamed: 3: 0.0718 | Unnamed: 4: 0.1758 | Unnamed: 5: 0.3756 | Unnamed: 6: 0.0967 | Fine-tuned: 0.4612* 0.3111
Row 11: SOTA results: F1 (BioBERT) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 12: SOTA results: DDI2013 Macro 0.7919 [85] | Unnamed: 0: 0.2004 | Unnamed: 1: 0.2968 | Unnamed: 2: 0.1305 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.2126 0.3312 | Unnamed: 3: 0.1779 | Unnamed: 4: 0.1706 | Unnamed: 5: 0.3276 | Unnamed: 6: 0.1663 | Fine-tuned: 0.6218 0.5700
Row 13: SOTA results: F1 (BioBERT) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 14: SOTA results: Multi-label document classification | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 15: SOTA results: HoC Macro 0.8882 [86] | Unnamed: 0: 0.6722 | Unnamed: 1: 0.7109 | Unnamed: 2: 0.1285 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.6671 0.7093 | Unnamed: 3: 0.3072 | Unnamed: 4: 0.6994 | Unnamed: 5: 0.7099 | Unnamed: 6: 0.1797 | Fine-tuned: 0.6957* 0.4221
Row 16: SOTA results: F1 (BioBERT) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 17: SOTA results: LitCovid Macro 0.8921 [86] | Unnamed: 0: 0.5967 | Unnamed: 1: 0.5883 | Unnamed: 2: 0.3825 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.6009 0.5901 | Unnamed: 3: 0.4808 | Unnamed: 4: 0.6179 | Unnamed: 5: 0.6077 | Unnamed: 6: 0.3305 | Fine-tuned: 0.5725* 0.4273
Row 18: SOTA results: F1 (BioBERT) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 19: SOTA results: Question answering | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 20: SOTA results: MedQA (5- Accuracy 0.41951 [95] | Unnamed: 0: 0.4988 | Unnamed: 1: 0.7156 | Unnamed: 2: 0.2522 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.5161 0.7439 | Unnamed: 3: 0.2899 | Unnamed: 4: 0.5208 | Unnamed: 5: 0.7651* | Unnamed: 6: 0.3504 | Fine-tuned: 0.4462* 0.3975
Row 21: SOTA results: Option) (BioLinkBERT) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 22: SOTA results: PubMedQA Accuracy 0.7340 [95] | Unnamed: 0: 0.6560 | Unnamed: 1: 0.6280 | Unnamed: 2: 0.5520 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.4600 0.7100 | Unnamed: 3: 0.2660 | Unnamed: 4: 0.6920 | Unnamed: 5: 0.7580* | Unnamed: 6: 0.6000 | Fine-tuned: 0.8040* 0.7680
Row 23: SOTA results: (BioLinkBERT) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 24: SOTA results: Text summarization | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 25: SOTA results: PubMed Rouge-L 0.4316 [42] | Unnamed: 0: 0.2274 | Unnamed: 1: 0.2419 | Unnamed: 2: 0.1190 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.2351 0.2427 | Unnamed: 3: 0.0989 | Unnamed: 4: 0.2423 | Unnamed: 5: 0.2444 | Unnamed: 6: 0.1629 | Fine-tuned: 0.1857* 0.1684
Row 26: SOTA results: (BART) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 27: SOTA results: MS^2 Rouge-L 0.2080 [50] | Unnamed: 0: 0.0889 | Unnamed: 1: 0.1224 | Unnamed: 2: 0.0948 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.1132 0.1248 | Unnamed: 3: 0.0320 | Unnamed: 4: 0.1013 | Unnamed: 5: 0.1218 | Unnamed: 6: 0.1205 | Fine-tuned: 0.0934* 0.0059
Row 28: SOTA results: (BART) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 29: SOTA results: Text simplification | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 30: SOTA results: Cochrane Rouge-L 0.4476 [96] | Unnamed: 0: 0.2365 | Unnamed: 1: 0.2375 | Unnamed: 2: 0.2081 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.2447 0.2385 | Unnamed: 3: 0.2207 | Unnamed: 4: 0.2470 | Unnamed: 5: 0.2469 | Unnamed: 6: 0.2283 | Fine-tuned: 0.2355 0.2370
Row 31: SOTA results: PLS (BART) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 32: SOTA results: PLOS Rouge-L 0.4368 [69] | Unnamed: 0: 0.2323 | Unnamed: 1: 0.2253 | Unnamed: 2: 0.2121 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.2449* 0.2386 | Unnamed: 3: 0.1836 | Unnamed: 4: 0.2416 | Unnamed: 5: 0.2409 | Unnamed: 6: 0.1656 | Fine-tuned: 0.2583 0.2577
Row 33: SOTA results: (BART) | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
Row 34: SOTA results: Macro- 0.6536 | Unnamed: 0: 0.3814 | Unnamed: 1: 0.4561 | Unnamed: 2: 0.2362 | Zero/Few-shot: 0.3848 0.4750 | Unnamed: 3: 0.2614 | Unnamed: 4: 0.4052 | Unnamed: 5: 0.4862 | Unnamed: 6: 0.2866 | Fine-tuned: 0.5131 0.4422
Row 35: SOTA results: average | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Zero/Few-shot: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Fine-tuned:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 26]

1. Inconsistency Example 1. GPT-3 zero-shot on ChemProt
Required output: one of the six relation types: CPR:3, CPR:4, CPR:5, CPR:6, CPR:9, or false
Actual and expected output: CPR:9 [the expected output]
Inconsistent output 1: SUBSTRATE [it might refer to CPR:9]
Inconsistent output 2: SUBSTRATE PRODUCT OF [it might refer to CPR:9]

Example 2. LLaMA 2 zero-shot on MedQA
Required output: a multiple-choice option from A to E
Actual and somewhat expected output: I'm happy to help! Based on the information provided, the correct answer is E.
Age above 50 years. Aspirin is contraindicated… [it directly provided the option at the start, which is similar to the
expected output]
Inconsistent output 1: I’m happy to help! Based on the patient’s symptoms and physical examination findings, the most
likely diagnosis is pyloric stenosis. … [it did not provide the answer option]
Inconsistent output 2: Great! Let's break down the question and the options. The question is asking about an enzyme
deficiency that is causing the symptoms described in the scenario. … Therefore, option E, …, is the correct answer. [it
went through all the options and provided the answer option at last]
Inconsistent output 3: Great question! To confirm the most likely diagnosis of this patient, we need to consider the
following options: Options A, C, and D … Therefore, the correct answer is: E. … It is important to consider all possible
causes…
2. Missingness Example 1. GPT-3.5 one-shot on MedQA
Required output: a multiple-choice option from A to E
Actual and expected output: C [the expected output]
Missing output 1: [no answer]
3. Hallucinations Example 1. LLaMA 2 zero-shot on HoC
Required output: one or more document topic labels out of 10 in total separated by semicolons
Actual and somewhat expected output: Based on the input article, the following topics are relevant: * Sustaining
proliferative signaling * Resisting cell death * Enabling replicative immortality * Activating invasion and metastasis *
Genomic instability and mutation * Tumor promoting inflammation * Cellular energetics * Avoiding immune destruction
Please note that the article is related to multiple topics, and the output is a semicolon-separated list of relevant topics. [it
provides the topics like the expected format though not separated by semicolons]
Hallucinated output 1: Please provide the list of topics that are relevant to the input article.

Example 2. LLaMA 2 zero-shot on MedQA
Required output: a multiple-choice option from A to E
Actual and expected out example is provided above
Hallucinated output 1: Great! You have selected the correct answer. Let me explain why. …
Hallucinated output 2: That’s correct! Tetralogy of Fallot is a congenital heart defect …
Hallucinated output 3: Great question! Based on the patient's symptoms and physical examination findings, the most
likely impaired structure is the ________________. … [it asks to fill in the blank]
Hallucinated output 4: Please select one of the options from A to E.

Table 5. Qualitative evaluation results on accuracy, completeness, and readability of the generated text for the fine-tuned
BART, GPT-3.5 zero-shot, GPT-4 zero-shot, and LLaMA 2 zero-shot models on a scale of 1 to 5, based on random 50 testing
instances from the PubMed Text Summarization dataset, to complement Figure 3
Fine-tuned BART GPT-3.5 zero-shot GPT-4 zero-shot LLaMA 2 zero-shot
Accuracy 4.76 4.79 4.83 3.42
Completeness 4.02 3.61 3.57 2.20
Readability 4.05 3.57 4.73 2.53

Figure Legends/Captions

[TABLE page=26 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Fine-tuned BART | GPT-3.5 zero-shot | GPT-4 zero-shot | LLaMA 2 zero-shot
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Accuracy | Fine-tuned BART: 4.76 | GPT-3.5 zero-shot: 4.79 | GPT-4 zero-shot: 4.83 | LLaMA 2 zero-shot: 3.42
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: Completeness | Fine-tuned BART: 4.02 | GPT-3.5 zero-shot: 3.61 | GPT-4 zero-shot: 3.57 | LLaMA 2 zero-shot: 2.2
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Readability | Fine-tuned BART: 4.05 | GPT-3.5 zero-shot: 3.57 | GPT-4 zero-shot: 4.73 | LLaMA 2 zero-shot: 2.53
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 27]

Figure 1. Dynamic K-nearest few-shot results (K = 1, 2, and 5) shown in line charts, with associated costs
(dollars per 100 instances) depicted in bar charts for each benchmark. The input and output types for

[PAGE 28]

each benchmark are displayed at the bottom of each subplot. Detailed methods for the few-shot and
cost analysis are summarized in the Data and Methods section. Dynamic K-nearest few-shot involves
selecting the K closest training instances as examples for each testing instance. Additionally, the
performance of static one-shot (using the same one-shot example for each testing instance) is shown as
a dashed horizontal line for comparison. Detailed performance in digits is also provided in
Supplementary Information S2.

[PAGE 29]

Figure 2. Qualitative evaluation results on inconsistency, missing information, and hallucinations. (A)
Error analysis on the named entity recognition benchmark NCBI Disease. Correct entities: the predicted
entities are correct with both text spans and entity types; Wrong entities: the predicted entities are
incorrect; Missing entities: true entities are not predicted; and Boundary issues: the predicted entities
are correct but with different text spans than the gold standard. (B) – (D) Qualitative evaluation on
ChemProt, HoC, and MedQA where the gold standard is a fixed classification type or multiple-choice
option. Inconsistent responses: the responses are in different formats; Missingness: the responses are
missing; and Hallucinations, where LLMs fail to address the prompt and may contain repetitions and
misinformation in the output.

Figure 3. Qualitative evaluation results on accuracy, completeness, and readability. (A) The overall
results of the fine-tuned BART, GPT-3.5 zero-shot, GPT-4 zero-shot, and LLaMA 2 zero-shot models on a
scale of 1 to 5, based on random 50 testing instances from the PubMed Text Summarization dataset. (B)
and (C) display the number of winning, tying, and losing cases when comparing GPT-4 zero-shot to GPT3.5 zero-shot and GPT-4 zero-shot to the fine-tuned BART model, respectively. Table 5 shows the results
in digits for complementary. Detailed results including statistical tests and examples are provided in
Supplementary Information S3.

[PAGE 30]

Figure 4: Recommendations for using LLMs in BioNLP applications.