[PAGE 1]
BookGPT: A General Framework for Book
Recommendation Based on a Large Language Model
Aakas Zhiyuli1, Yanfang Chen2,*, Xuan Zhang3, and Xun Liang3
1AI for Science Institute, Beijing, China
2Renmin University of China, Libraries, China
3Renmin University of China, School of Information, China
*Corresponding author: cyf@ruc.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
With the continuous development and change exhibited by large language model (LLM) technology, represented by generative
pretrained transformers (GPTs), many classic scenarios in various fields have re-emerged with new opportunities. This
paper takes ChatGPT as the modeling object, incorporates LLM technology into the typical book resource understanding and
recommendation scenario for the first time, and puts it into practice. By building a ChatGPT -like book recommendation system
(BookGPT) framework based on ChatGPT, this paper attempts to apply ChatGPT to recommendation modeling for three typical
tasks, book rating recommendation, user rating recommendation, and book summary recommendation, and explores the
feasibility of LLM technology in book recommendation scenarios. At the same time, based on different evaluation schemes
for book recommendation tasks and the existing classic recommendation models, this paper discusses the advantages and
disadvantages of the BookGPT in book recommendation scenarios and analyzes the opportunities and improvement directions
for subsequent LLMs in these scenarios. The experimental research shows the following. (1) The BookGPT can achieve good
recommendation results in existing classic book recommendation tasks. Especially in cases containing less information about
the target object to be recommended, such as zero-shot or one-shot learning tasks, the performance of the BookGPT is close
to or even better than that of the current classic book recommendation algorithms, and this method has great potential for
improvement. (2) In text generation tasks such as book summary recommendation, the recommendation effect of the BookGPT
model is better than that of the manual editing process of Douban Reading, and it can even perform personalized interpretable
content recommendation based on readers’ attribute and identity information, making it is more persuasive than interpretable
one-size-fits-all recommendation models. Finally, we have open-sourced the relevant datasets and experimental codes, hoping
that the exploratory program proposed in this paper can inspire the development of more LLMs to expand their applications
and theoretical research prospects in the field of book recommendation and general recommendation tasks.
Introduction
Book understanding and personalized recommendation (BUPR) are crucial applications in the field of library and information
science (LIS). In the BUPR scenario, we typically need to solve several subproblems, such as (1) how to recommend suitable
books based on users’ interests and preferences, (2) how to predict the popularity of a new book for deciding whether to
purchase it, and (3) how to provide interpretable recommendations for different users to improve the user adoption rate. In
general, we need to model the interactions between readers and books, readers’ basic attributes, and books’ basic attributes,
among other types of feature and attribute data, and use different machine learning methods to train and optimize independent
recommendation models for each subtask, thus improving the final recommendation effect. However, as the scenario becomes
increasingly complex and the amount of data grows, it becomes challenging to meet various application and recommendation
needs. Is it possible to have a unified personalized recommendation paradigm that enables us to solve all kinds of basic
problems in the BUPR scenario with just a few task-relevant training examples? The answer is yes!
In recent years, with the rapid development of natural language processing (NLP) technology, significant changes have
emerged, both in terms of the scale of model parameters and the richness of training data. For example, in early December 2022,
OpenAI released a chatbot based on GPT-3.51 called Chat Generative Pretrained Transformer (ChatGPT)2. This chatbot is
based on large-scale pretrained language models and fine-tuned for efficient natural language understanding, as well as logical
reasoning in multiturn conversations. Specifically, it can perform a variety of NLP tasks, including assisting with code writing,
summarizing documents, and continuing novel writing. Since its release, this model has sparked heated discussion in industry.
arXiv:2305.15673v1 [cs.IR] 25 May 2023

[PAGE 2]
Figure 1. ChatGPT’s search volume in the Baidu Index from November 2022 to April 2023.
Figure 1 shows the trend chart of the Baidu search index for ChatGPT from its initial release in early December 2022 to the
present day, with typical important events annotated. From the chart, we can see that during the initial release stage (November
2022 - February 2023), due to the imperfect model performance and user interface, the overall popularity of ChatGPT remained
at a relatively low level. Starting in February, with OpenAI’s iteration of the model, as well as the reporting of several important
events, such as ChatGPT passing the Google engineer interview3 and the extensive participation of many companies, ChatGPT
began a thriving journey of research and application. By the end of April, the overall daily search volume for ChatGPT on
Baidu reached 90,000. Furthermore, the technical foundations of ChatGPT, its large language models (LLMs), have also
received great attention from the academic community1.
In particular, in the LIS field, an increasing amount of research has been conducted on the theoretical aspects related
to ChatGPT-like models. For example, studies have examined the technical ethics and risks associated with ChatGPT-like
models4–7, as well as how to better utilize ChatGPT in LIS8, 9. However, these studies mainly focused on theoretical influences
and application analyses of ChatGPT without conducting extensive experiments and testing in practical LIS scenarios. It
is worth exploring and researching a through experimental verification of whether ChatGPT models can be used to build
recommendation frameworks to solve recommendation problems in LIS and how ChatGPT models perform compared to
traditional recommendation models in these scenarios, as along with their advantages and disadvantages. Therefore, this paper
focuses on the BUPR scenario to empirically investigate the feasibility of using ChatGPT models in book recommendation
settings and evaluate the performance of ChatGPT models through experimental comparisons on BUPR tasks.
The main contributions of this article include the following. (1) For the first time, this article applies LLMs such as ChatGPT
to build a unified recommendation system framework for the classic BUPR task in the LIS field to explore the possibility of
applying LLMs in LIS. (2) Based on the BUPR scenario, we discuss construction ideas and prompt engineering methods for
three subtasks: the book rating task, user book rating preference recommendation task, and book summary recommendation
task. Two different prompt modelling methods, zero-shot modelling and few-shot modelling, are verified in terms of their
feasibility through empirical research. (3) Finally, this article open-sourced the data and testing schemes involved in the
experimental process to facilitate further research and discussion on the corresponding issues.
The organization of this article is as follows. First, we discuss the related work involved in this study from two directions:
"LLMs" and "book recommendations". Then, we first provide an overview of the BookGPT model, followed by detailed
formal definitions of the three subtasks of book recommendation. Then, we further propose the construction methods of prompt
engineering, the verification methods applied to the output results, and the methods for evaluating recommendation effectiveness.
Afterwards, we conduct a detailed experimental evaluation of the ChatGPT-like book recommendation system (BookGPT),
including a dataset analysis, an evaluation scheme design, and an experimental results discussion. Finally, we summarize the
research content and focus of this article and provide future research directions in the field of book recommendation based on
LLMs.

[PAGE 3]
Related Works
Large Language Models
LLMs typically refer to NLP models with parameter sizes exceeding billions. Recently, research on LLMs has become an
important frontier in the field of NLP, from the widely used and researched statistical language models (SLMs)10–12, to neural
language models (NLMs) based on neural networks for NLP13, 14, to pretrained language models (PLMs)15–17, and finally to
LLMs18–21. With the iteration of these models, NLP technology has exhibited typical characteristics: the model parameter
scale is becoming larger, the context awareness of these models is strengthening, the durations of multiturn conversations are
lengthening, and multiple modalities of interaction are being utilized.
An LLM is a neural network architecture model based on the transformer mechanism22 that extracts and expresses natural
language features by introducing multihead attention and stacking multiple layers of deep neural networks. Among the various
types of available LLMs18–21, the main differences lie in the sizes of their training corpora, model parameter sizes, and scaling
sizes. Based on a well-designed prompt engineering strategy23, LLMs trained on large-scale corpora can usually produce good
dialogue results. The natural language understanding and response abilities exhibited by current LLM models are generally
believed to be emergent abilities24, 25 resulting from the tremendous growth in the number of model parameters and the size of
the training corpus; i.e., when the parameter scale exceeds a certain level, the developed model exhibits new abilities that are
radically different from those of its previous levels, such as in-context learning (ICL)26 and chain of thought (CoT)27.
Popular versions of LLM models currently include the GPT3/4 series of models (released by OpenAI)18, the LLaMA model
(released by Meta), and the GLM130B model (released by Tsinghua University). However, due to the strong commercial
promotion and good product design provided by Microsoft and OpenAI, the ChatGPT application built on top of the GPT3.5/4
series of models is being increasingly adopted and used by researchers and enterprises in various real-world scenarios, such as
intelligent customer service28, interactive translation29, and personal assistants30. Considering the cost of experimentation, this
paper’s LLMs are based on OpenAI’s GPT3.5 and use gpt-3.5-turbo-0301 as the kernel model, using application programming
interfaces (APIs) provided by OpenAI.
Personalized Book Recommendations
Book understanding and recommendation is a fundamental application problem in the field of LIS. With the continuous increase
in the number of book resources, both the number of book types and the number of interactions with readers are rapidly
increasing. Therefore, how to select suitable books from a massive candidate set for recommendation is a fundamental problem.
Generally, we can use personalized recommendation models to solve this typical information overload problem. In existing
recommendation systems, the basic definition of a user’s preference probability for an itemi can be represented by the following
function:
yi→u = f (hi, hu) ∈ [0,1]
where hi and hu represent the learned item feature representation and user feature representation, respectively, and f (·)
represents the scoring function that matches the user and item features, such as the cosine similarity function and multilayer
perceptron module. Therefore, the existing research on personalized book recommendation can be partly summarized as
follows.
Collaborative Filtering (CF)-Based Methods: CF is a classic and practical book recommendation algorithm based on
the similarity between readers or books. The basic idea is that if user 1 likes book A and user 2 also likes books A and B, it
can be assumed that there is a certain similarity between user 1 and user 2. Therefore, the other items liked by user 1 can
be recommended to user 2, or vice versa. CF models can be divided into two types: user-based CF 31, 32 and item-based CF
models33, 34. CF models usually require a large amount of user behaviour data for training and prediction, so they are difficult
to use in cases with sparse data or cold-start situations.
Deep Learning (DL)-Based Methods: In recent years, an increasing number of DL-based book recommendation algorithms
have been proposed to better address the issues affecting CF models. DL models can learn more complex feature representations
from user interaction data, thereby improving their recommendation accuracy. Specifically, DL-based book recommendation
algorithms can be divided into two types: matrix factorization-based models35, 36 and sequence-based models37.
Graph Neural Network (GNN)-Based Methods: A GNN-based recommendation system is a recently proposed algorithm
that combines graph theory and DL 38. A GNN-based book recommendation system represents readers, books, and their
interaction information as a graph and then uses the GNN model to learn and aggregate the node and edge features in the graph,
obtaining higher-order feature representations for different recommendation tasks39, 40.

[PAGE 4]
Methods
Overview
This paper proposes a BookGPT. By combining the existing LLMs with typical tasks found in book recommendation
scenarios, this framework constructs appropriate prompt strategies based on different task features and combines data validation,
backtracking, and retrying methods to explore the possibility of using LLMs in book recommendation scenarios. The BookGPT
framework is divided into four modules: (1) book recommendation task definition and data preparation, (2) prompt engineering,
(3) GPT-based interaction and response parsing, and (4) task evaluation.
Figure 2. Framework of the BookGPT.
Book recommendation task definition and data preparation.The BookGPT framework is mainly targeted at three typical
book recommendation applications, including book rating recommendation, user rating recommendation, and book content
summary recommendation. These three scenarios correspond to the following aspects in the book business: high-quality new
book screening based on rating potential, personalized recommendation based on reader preferences, and book explainability
recommendation based on content summaries. In these three scenarios, the feature system can be divided into three categories:
basic user attribute features, book resource attribute features, and user-book interaction behaviour features. Therefore, it is
usually possible to construct recommendation strategies for zero-shot and few-shot settings based on different application
scenarios and data enrichment situations to improve the satisfaction achieved by the resulting recommendations. The specific
formalizations and definitions of the above tasks are described in detail in Section "Book Recommendation Task Definition".
Prompt engineering. Unlike traditional recommendation systems, the core recommendation module of the BookGPT
is composed of an LLM, its recommendation process depends on the model’s understanding and representation of natural
language commands, and the output results are also highly flexible. Therefore, by designing appropriate prompt formats, the
model’s ability to understand tasks and the effectiveness of the final output results can be effectively enhanced41. Basic prompt
engineering involves four core parts: an injected identity, a task description prompt, a task boundary prompt, and an output
format prompt. At the same time, the prompt format of CoT 1 can be used to guide the model to solve complex tasks in a
step-by-step manner and increase the modelling accuracy of the model. For a detailed analysis of the prompt engineering

[PAGE 5]
process of the BookGPT models, please refer to Section "Prompt Engineering for Book Recommendation".
GPT-based interaction and response parsing. The BookGPT model proposed in this article is tested and modelled using
the ChatGPT API provided by OpenAI1. The LLM used is the "gpt-3.5-turbo-0301" model, which is an optimized version
based on GPT-3.5. It has faster response times and is approximately 10 times less expensive to call than the base model of
GPT-3.5 with the same number of token requests. At the same time, due to the addition of many random factors in the response
process of ChatGPT (to prevent the returned answers from being too convergent), it is necessary to perform a targeted formal
verification for each returned result. If the obtained response does not satisfy the requirements of the established task, it is
necessary to improve the prompt method or try to request it again. For a detailed description, please refer to Section "Output
Verification and Task Restarting".
Task evaluation. As the BookGPT is the first framework to apply an LLM to the book recommendation system scenario,
no evaluations of the application efficiency and feasibility of this scenario have been performed in previous studies. Therefore,
we attempt to design two evaluation strategies, including a metric evaluation and an interpretability evaluation, to evaluate
and discuss the performance achieved by the BookGPT on the three key tasks in the book recommendation scenario. Through
detailed empirical research, we explore and analyse the advantages and problems of the BookGPT in the book recommendation
scenario and conduct relevant discussions on subsequent research directions. The detailed analysis of this part can be found in
Sections "Task Evaluation" and "Experiments".
Book Recommendation Task Definition
Book Rating Recommendation
The book rating task is one of the fundamental tasks in book recommendation scenarios, especially those such as introducing
new books and performing book evaluations. To effectively evaluate the ability of the recommendation system constructed
by ChatGPT-like LLMs on this task, this paper verifies it through two modelling methods, zero-shot modelling and few-shot
modelling, and measures the quality of the recommendation system by examining the difference between the rating results of
the discriminant system and the actual rating results. The specific task definition is as follows.
Zero-Shot Modelling. Given a book name bx and an author name without any background information, the system is
required to output a rating result Rbx ∈ [0,10] for the corresponding book, where a higher score indicates that the book is more
recommended for reading.
Few-Shot Modelling. Compared to zero-shot testing, the essence of few-shot testing is to enhance the model’s understanding
of the given task by providing partial sample information, with the hope of improving the final prediction performance. Therefore,
in this paper, the few-shot testing case for book rating is defined as follows: given a list of books with their corresponding
ratings as pairs for the same author, Pui = (b1, Rb1), (b2, Rb2), ...,(bn, Rbn), a small portion of them (e.g., k) are selected as
known input information, and the system is required to rate the remaining books from the same author. Finally, the system’s
rating results are evaluated by the difference between the predicted ratings and the actual ratings of the remaining samples.
User Rating Preference Recommendation
The user rating recommendation task has a wider range of application scenarios than the book rating task, such as predicting
the book preferences of users for e-commerce sales, predicting the interest levels of readers in book borrowing, predicting
clicks, and predicting library browsing. This task typically uses historical interactions (clicks, browsing, borrowing, collecting,
commenting, rating, etc.) between readers and books as feature data sources, combines them with basic user attributes and
book attributes, and utilizes various machine learning models to build accurate recommendations. In this article, the specific
task is defined as follows.
One-Shot User Preference Modelling. Given a historical book behaviour sample sequence (such as a rating sequence) for
user ui, Hui = {b1, b2, ...,bn}, the model is only provided with a single training sample as a hint or training set and is required
to score the remaining samples in the behaviour sequence. The final evaluation is based on the consistency between the model’s
scoring results and the original sample results.
N-Shot User Preference Modelling. Given a historical book behaviour sequence (such as a rating sequence) for user
ui, Hui = {b1, b2, ...,bn}, a certain proportion of the data is selected as the training set (or prompt set) from it. The model is
required to score the remaining sequence based on the provided training set, and the final evaluation is the consistency between
the model’s scoring results and the original sample results.
Book Summary Recommendation
The task of book summary recommendation aims to automatically extract concise and accurate summary content from books,
providing readers with a quick way to understand the main contents of the books. This task typically utilizes NLP techniques,
including text summarization, text classification, information extraction, and other techniques, to achieve its goals. In practical
applications, summaries can serve as important data sources for book recommendation, search result previewing, knowledge
1https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference

[PAGE 6]
graph construction, and other areas. Therefore, in this section, we compare the summaries generated by the ChatGPT model
with the standard summaries produced by humans and evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed recommendation system from
the perspectives of interpretability and credibility. We answer two questions. (1) Can large-scale language models such as
ChatGPT and WenXinYiYan (WenXin)42 (released by Baidu) achieve better results than humans in book summary generation
tasks? (2) Will ChatGPT and Wenxin exhibit different summarization abilities for different categories of literary genres, such as
novels, essays, and poetry? The specific generation forms of the comparison task include the following.
Summaries Without Length Limitations. This task generates summary recommendations based on specified author and
book title information, with no limit imposed on the character length.
Summaries with Length Limitations. Because the summaries generated by LLMs usually contain more characters than
those of humans, to further ensure the fairness of the comparison, the maximum number of characters that can be generated
is further limited when generating an abstract with the model. Specifically, the model is required to generate summary
recommendations based on the specified author and book title information, with a forced limit imposed on the maximum
number of characters that can be generated; this limit is the same as the character count of the manual abstract provided for the
same book.
Prompt Engineering for Book Recommendation
As far as we know, LLMs are typical generative language models, so the quality of the output contents of these models usually
exhibit significant correlations with the input prompt contents. Therefore, in this section, we discuss how to design effective
prompt content23 for various types of book recommendation tasks to achieve improved recommendation efficiency. As shown
in Figure 4, we provide prompt engineering examples for three typical book recommendation scenarios. Generally, prompt
content typically includes four parts.
(1) Role Injection Prompt. This prompt is mainly used to indicate the role type represented by the LLM, guiding it to
respond differently according to specific role types. For example, in the first task of book recommendation, the book rating task,
if no prompt is given for identity injection ("Assuming you are a professional book rating expert") and ChatGPT is instead
directly asked to answer a task requirement such as "Please rate the book xxx", ChatGPT usually responds with a refusal to
answer.
Figure 3. Example of role injection.
(1) Task Description Prompt. This prompt is used to provide information about the specific task that ChatGPT is being
asked to perform. It typically includes details such as the type of task, the goal of the task, and any relevant information about
the input data or context. This prompt helps ChatGPT understand the task and generate more accurate and relevant responses.
For example, in a book recommendation task, the task description prompt might include information about the user’s reading
preferences, the desired book genre, and any specific requirements or constraints for the recommendation process.

[PAGE 7]
Certainly, due to the current limitations of model inference capabilities, the lengths of task description prompts are usually
restricted within a certain range (the current GPT3.5 version limits the total number of tokens for model responses and prompt
contents to 4096 2) to obtain better model inference results. Typically, content prompts based on task examples (few-shot
scenarios) serve as additional training samples for the model, which can further enhance the model’s fitting and understanding
of the task, ultimately leading to better prediction results.
(3) Task Boundary Prompt. This prompt is used to impose negative limitations on ChatGPT-like models, telling them
what not to do in a given task. For example, in a book rating task, if only identity injection and task description prompts are
used, the model will often generate the corresponding rating and a long explanatory passage, which can cause difficulties for
downstream applications. Therefore, it is necessary to explicitly provide limits and tell the model what the task boundary is;
that is, no textual explanation is needed, and only the rating result should be output. At this point, the model will only produce
the corresponding rating score as needed.
(4)Task Output Format Prompt. After completing the role injection, task description, and boundary prompts in the
BookGPT, we also need to tell the model about the final output format. The main benefits of this prompt are (1) improving the
accuracy of the model’s output results: by specifying the output format of the model, we can ensure that the results produced by
the model satisfy the requirements of downstream systems, avoiding errors and unnecessary additional processing steps caused
by mismatched data formats; And (2) enhancing the maintainability of the system: by explicitly specifying the output format
of the model, we can avoid the need for downstream systems to make significant modifications and adjustments when the
model’s output format changes, thereby enhancing the system’s maintainability and scalability. For example, for the book rating
prediction task, the output format needs to be limited to a value with two decimal places. For the user preference estimation
task, the output format needs to be limited to a Python list format.
Figure 4. Prompt examples for the BookGPT.
Output Verification and Task Restarting
Through the design of a prompt engineering strategy, we can ensure that the output of the model satisfies the expected definition
to some extent. However, since ChatGPT-type models are essentially natural language probability models, and because
ChatGPT incorporates stochastic factors into its design to ensure the diversity of the generated results1, it is possible that the
model may produce different response results for the same input request. Therefore, in the end, we also need to recheck the
legality of the generated content produced by ChatGPT-type models, that is, perform a secondary verification on the critical
output data format and the requirements.
In this module, we build independent validation functions for each type of book recommendation subtask. For example, for
the book rating task, we need to check if the returned result is a numerical value. For the user rating recommendation task, we
2https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer

[PAGE 8]
need to extract the rating values corresponding to the books in the returned result and check if the number of returned results
matches the requested quantity. For the book summary task, we need to check if the length of the returned text satisfies the
input requirements. If the result returned by ChatGPT does not meet the specified format requirements, we need to resend the
request to the recommendation module until the maximum number of retries is reached (the maximum number of retries in this
framework is set to 3).
Task Evaluation
To validate the performance of the BookGPT (including zero-shot and few-shot modelling), we evaluate the system from two
aspects: a task metric evaluation and an interpretability evaluation.
Task metric evaluation: We evaluate the recommendation performance of the BookGPT on two subtasks: book rating
recommendation and user rating preference recommendation. Specifically, we treat the book rating task as a regression model
and evaluate the performance of different recommendation models in terms of the mean absolute error (MAE), mean absolute
percentage error (MAPE), and root mean square error (RMSE) metrics. For the user rating preference recommendation task,
which is treated as a sorted rating recommendation process, in addition to focusing on the MAE, MAPE, and RMSE, we further
evaluate the performance of different models in terms of the normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG) metric. The
specific calculation methods for each metric are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Task evaluation metrics.
Metrics Equations Concerns
MAE 1
n ∑n
i=1 |yi − ˜yi| absolute error
MAPE 1
n ∑n
i=1 |yi − ˜yi| / |yi| percentage error
RMSE
q
n ∑n
i=1 (yi − ˜yi)2 divergence
NDCG@k Details43 cumulative gain
Interpretability Evaluation: This part mainly evaluates the recommendation ability of the BookGPT in the book summary
recommendation task. The goal of this task is to identify the key content of a book through its summary and arouse readers’
interest in reading or purchasing it. Therefore, in this evaluation, we use manually generated summaries as the ground truth to
evaluate the book summary generation performance of the BookGPT model when different testing books. Specifically, since
ChatGPT was trained on English corpora, we also introduce a large Chinese language model, Wenxin (released by Baidu
Group) as a reference to test the performance of an LLM on Chinese summaries and compare it with ChatGPT. Finally, through
the above two types of evaluations and empirical studies, we attempt to answer the following three questions.
• Q1: What tasks in the book recommendation scenario are the BookGPT suitable for? How is its performance?
• Q2: Is there a significant difference between the final recommendation performances achieved with zero-shot modelling
and few-shot modelling in the BookGPT?
• Q3: In the book recommendation scenario, what are the potential research directions concerning ChatGPT-like LLMs in
the future? What problems can they solve?
Experiments
As shown in Table 2, the experimental datasets in this article include three types of data: book rating data, book summary data,
and book-user interaction data.
Table 2. Datasets.
Datasets Types Amount
Douban Rating scores 3228 books
Douban Book Summary summary text 50 books
Goodbook-10k scores, interactions 10k books

[PAGE 9]
Douban Rating: This dataset was collected from the book rating channel of Douban3, which includes four key fields: book
title, author, rating, and number of comments. Due to the limited number of API requests for OpenAI, only books with more
than 2000 ratings are selected as the test dataset, resulting in 3228 popular books for evaluation purposes. In this experiment,
we evaluate the performance of the BookGPT under zero-shot learning and different levels of few-shot learning (1/3-shot
learning and 2/3-shot learning), and the core observation indicators are the MAE, MAPE, and RMSE.
Douban Book Summary:To evaluate the model’s ability to summarize and recommend book content, we select 50 popular
books from the Douban TOP250 book channel4, including 4 categories of literary genres and their human-written summaries:
20 novels, 10 essays, 10 poems, and 10 dramas. The human-written summaries are provided by Douban’s book editing experts
and are used as the benchmark for the comparison. The summary results of the BookGPT model and the Wenxin model in the
"restricted size" and "free size" summary scenarios are used as comparison models.
Notably, to ensure the fairness of the evaluation results, we first randomly mix the human-written summaries and model
summaries and present them in a random order to different annotators. Then, 15 annotation participants are asked to rank the
summaries, and each summary must be annotated for at least 3 minutes. If a summary is ranked higher, it is considered to
have a stronger recommendation ability and more attractiveness. Finally, the results acquired from different annotators are
processed to obtain the evaluation results for each model with respect to different literary genres of books and overall. The core
observation indicators for this task are the summary evaluation score and average summary length. The calculation method for
the final score of each model’s summary is as follows:
ScoreM1 = 1
N
rank
∑
i
f req× wi
In the above formula, N is the total number of annotators in the test, and f req is the number of times the corresponding
model option appears in position i with a weight of wi. For example, assuming that 15 people participate in annotation sorting,
three options need to be sorted, with positions 1, 2, and 3 corresponding to scores of 3, 2, and 1, respectively. Then, if model
X’s sorted summary results for book Y are first place 10 times, second place 2 times, and third place 3 times, the comprehensive
score of model X’s summary for book Y in this test is (103+22+3*1)/15 = 2.47 points.
GoodBook-10k: The GoodBook-10k dataset44 was collected from the Goodreads 5 book review website, which is the
largest online reading community in the world and is similar to Douban Reading in China. The GoodBook-10k dataset contains
rating data for 10,000 popular books and 5.98 million users’ ratings, with fields including book ratings, user bookshelf labels,
book metadata, and book tags. In this paper, we use it for the user rating task, which includes three forms at the prompt level:
1-shot, 10-shot, and 20-shot learning, where the model is provided with 1, 10, or 20 model rating records, respectively, and is
required to predict the remaining records and provide user preference rankings. The benchmark models for this task include the
BookGPT model proposed in this article, as well as four classic CF-based recommendation algorithm models for personalized
recommendation scenarios: the matrix factorization model (FunkSVD)45, the K-nearest neighbours (KNN; means) model46,
the SlopeOne47 model, and the CoClustering48 model. The evaluation metrics are the NDCG@5,10,15,20, MAE, MAPE, and
RMSE.
Results
This section analyses the performance achieved by the BookGPT model and the baseline models on different tasks, answering
the questions raised above; namely, how does the BookGPT model perform on different tasks in the book recommendation
scenario? Can few-shot learning improve the recommendation performance of the BookGPT model?
Book Rating Task. As shown in Table 3, the prediction results yielded by the BookGPT model in book rating tasks are
analysed under zero-shot modelling, 1/3-shot modelling, and 2/3-shot modelling. Overall, the BookGPT model exhibits a good
regression prediction ability, with MAPE values ranging from 8.8% to 5.4%, indicating that it performs well on book rating
tasks. The overall absolute percentage error is within a small range of 10%, and even for 2/3-shot modelling, the MAPE can
reach an estimated value of 5.4%.
3https://book.douban.com/
4https://book.douban.com/top250
5https://goodreads.com/

[PAGE 10]
Table 3. Results of the book rating task.
BookGPT MAE MAPE RMSE
Zero-shot modelling 0.682 0.088 0.886
1/3-shot modelling 0.441 ( ↓35.34%) 0.057 ( ↓35.23%) 0.558 ( ↓37.02%)
2/3-shot modelling 0.419 (↓38.56%) 0.054 (↓38.64%) 0.538 (↓39.28%)
Furthermore, based on the results of few-shot modelling with prompt enhancement, the accuracy of the estimated rating is
significantly improved compared to that of zero-shot modelling. The model’s MAE value decreases from 0.682 (zero-shot) to
0.441 (1/3-shot modelling) and 0.419 (2/3-shot modelling), representing 35.34% and 38.56% mean absolute error decreases
compared to that of zero-shot modelling, respectively. In addition, the model’s RMSE also decreases significantly, from 0.886
to 0.558 (1/3-shot modelling) and 0.538 (2/3-shot modelling), with a relative decrease in the optimal mean square error of
39.28% (2/3-shot modelling). This result indicates that few-shot modelling can significantly reduce the prediction error
induced by zero-shot modelling in the book rating task by providing reference samples for the BookGPT model.
Finally, comparing the results of the BookGPT model with those of different levels of prompt-based few-shot learning,
increasing the prompt size again (from 1/3 to 2/3 of the training set) leads to an additional improvement in the final performance.
However, the improvement from zero-shot learning to 1/3-shot learning is larger than the improvement from 1/3- to 2/3-shot
learning. This is because the 1/3 prompt size already provides a good information reference for the BookGPT model, and
further increasing the prompt size brings limited information gain while increasing the model’s reasoning overhead. Therefore,
in practical applications, the appropriate prompt size can be selected based on the information gain inflection point through
ablation experiments and in combination with the scenario’s needs, thus effectively yielding improved few-shot learning
performance.
User Rating Preference Recommendation Task. Figure 5 represents the NDCG evaluation results obtained for the user
rating preference recommendation task.
MF(FunkSVD)
KNN(means)
SlopeOne
CoClustering
BookGPT
NDCG
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
K@5 K@10 K@15 K@20
(a) 1-shot, NCDG@k={5,10,15,20}
MF(FunkSVD)
KNN(means)
SlopeOne
CoClustering
BookGPT
NDCG
0.85
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
K@5 K@10 K@15 K@20 (b) 10-shot, NCDG@k={5,10,15,20}
MF(FunkSVD)
KNN(means)
SlopeOne
CoClustering
BookGPT
NDCG
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
K@5 K@10 K@15 K@20 (c) 20-shot, NCDG@k={5,10,15,20}
MF(FunkSVD)
KNN(means)
SlopeOne
CoClustering
BookGPT
NDCG
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.89
Few-shot@N=1 Few-shot@N=10 Few-shot@N=20
(d) NDCG@5, prompt items = {1,10,20}
MF(FunkSVD)
KNN(means)
SlopeOne
CoClustering
BookGPT
NDCG
0.940
0.942
0.944
0.946
0.948
0.950
0.952
0.954
0.956
0.958
0.960
0.962
Few-shot@N=1 Few-shot@N=10 Few-shot@N=20 (e) NDCG@20, prompt items = {1,10,20}
Figure 5. NDCG scores obtained in the user rating preference recommendation task.
First, overall, the MF (FunkSVD) model can achieve good results in different subtasks, especially in the single-sample
scenario, where it performs best. The reason for this is that the recommendation strategy based on FunkSVD models the
user-book rating interaction matrix through matrix factorization. The optimization goal of this modelling method is to make the
residual between the user ratings and the rating product obtained by matrix multiplication as small as possible. Therefore, even

[TABLE page=10 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | 0.94 | Unnamed: 1
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | 0.94: | Unnamed: 1: 0.94
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: 0.92 | 0.94: 0.93 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | 0.94: | Unnamed: 1: 0.93
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | 0.94: 0.92 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: 0.90 | 0.94: | Unnamed: 1: 0.92
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | 0.94: 0.91 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | 0.94: | Unnamed: 1: 0.91
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: 0.900.88 | 0.94: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | 0.94: | Unnamed: 1: 0.9
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | 0.94: 0.89 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: 0.86 | 0.94: | Unnamed: 1: 0.89
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 11]
with limited reference rating information provided by the user to be predicted (such as in 1-shot learning), FunkSVD can still
achieve good results in terms of metrics such as the RMSE. However, as the number of effective prompt samples (features)
for a single user increases, clustering models represented by KNN (means) begin to perform better. During the prediction
process, KNN (means) relies on modelling the user’s historical rating habits to generate the final estimation result, leading
to a prediction accuracy increase with the increase in the number of prompt samples. Notably, the BookGPT also achieves
the second-best recommendation results in terms of the NDCG metric in the one-shot scenario, which once again confirms
the advantage of the BookGPT in small sample recommendation scenarios. However, it is also observed that compared with
the application of classic recommendation models, the application effect of the LLM-based BookGPT still has worse
personalized user understanding and modelling.
Table 4. The prediction errors induced in the user rating preference recommendation task.
Prompt items Models Indicators
MAE MAPE RMSE
1-shot modelling
FunkSVD45 0.765 0.259 0.956
KNN (means)46 0.865 0.283 1.153
SlopeOne47 0.843 0.278 1.117
CoClustering48 0.836 0.276 1.107
BookGPT 1.075 0.297 1.342
10-shot modelling
FunkSVD45 0.733 0.249 0.917
KNN (means)46 0.708 0.236 0.912
SlopeOne47 0.741 0.242 0.965
CoClustering48 0.737 0.243 0.961
BookGPT 0.915 0.263 1.184
20-shot modelling
FunkSVD45 0.710 0.241 0.892
KNN (means)46 0.676 0.226 0.879
SlopeOne47 0.700 0.233 0.905
CoClustering48 0.703 0.235 0.910
BookGPT 0.842 0.248 1.116
Second, comparing the results based obtained on different prompt sample quantities, the NDCG score of the FunkSVD
model is not sensitive to the number of samples, and its performance remains consistent across the 1-shot, 10-shot, and 20-shot
subtasks. However, other baseline models, such as KNN (means), SlopeOne, CoClustering, and the BookGPT model, exhibit
significant changes in their NDCG scores as the number of prompt samples increases. This is because these models build
a model of the user’s historical ratings during the result prediction process. For example, in the BookGPT model, during
the rating process, the model uses the user’s historical book rating preferences as background knowledge to model the user’s
interest preferences and makes comprehensive predictions for the newly predicted samples by referencing this knowledge. With
an appropriate number of prompt samples, the BookGPT model can typically learn real-time contextual knowledge and apply it
to the prediction scenario. This capability is also known as in-context learning1, which is one of the important foundational
capabilities of LLMs. As shown in Table 4, by increasing the number of prompt samples, the BookGPT model achieves
significant improvements in terms of its MAE, MAPE, and RMSE metrics in the 20-shot subtask, with error reductions of
21.67%, 16.53%, and 16.84%, respectively.
Finally, when evaluating different types of metrics, it can be observed that in situations where the prompt samples are
relatively few, such as in the 1-shot scenario, the BookGPT model performs well in terms of its ranking ability (NDCG), but
it does not show any advantage in terms of error measurement (the MAE/MAPE/RMSE metrics) over the control models.
Additionally, increasing the number of prompt samples for a single user from 10 shots to 20 shots does not result in a similar
performance improvement in terms of the NDCG, including the BookGPT model. However, the error metric increases are still
considerable. Therefore, if the application scenario emphasizes the absolute value preference of each user to be recommended,
the effect can be improved by increasing the number of prompt samples for each user. If the focus is only on the relative
ranking ability, performing modelling based on a small number of samples can satisfy the imposed requirements and further
save inference resources.
Book Summary Recommendation Task. During the evaluation process of this task, to ensure the effectiveness of the
results, all annotation processes are carried out anonymously with initial order randomization and cross-evaluation, requiring the

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Indicators | Unnamed: 3
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Prompt items | Unnamed: 1: Models | Unnamed: 2: | Indicators: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: MAE | Indicators: MAPE | Unnamed: 3: RMSE
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: FunkSVD45 | Unnamed: 2: 0.765 | Indicators: 0.259 | Unnamed: 3: 0.956
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: KNN (means)46 | Unnamed: 2: 0.865 | Indicators: 0.283 | Unnamed: 3: 1.153
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: 1-shot modelling | Unnamed: 1: SlopeOne47 | Unnamed: 2: 0.843 | Indicators: 0.278 | Unnamed: 3: 1.117
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: CoClustering48 | Unnamed: 2: 0.836 | Indicators: 0.276 | Unnamed: 3: 1.107
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: BookGPT | Unnamed: 2: 1.075 | Indicators: 0.297 | Unnamed: 3: 1.342
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: FunkSVD45 | Unnamed: 2: 0.733 | Indicators: 0.249 | Unnamed: 3: 0.917
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: KNN (means)46 | Unnamed: 2: 0.708 | Indicators: 0.236 | Unnamed: 3: 0.912
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: 10-shot modelling | Unnamed: 1: SlopeOne47 | Unnamed: 2: 0.741 | Indicators: 0.242 | Unnamed: 3: 0.965
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: CoClustering48 | Unnamed: 2: 0.737 | Indicators: 0.243 | Unnamed: 3: 0.961
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: BookGPT | Unnamed: 2: 0.915 | Indicators: 0.263 | Unnamed: 3: 1.184
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: FunkSVD45 | Unnamed: 2: 0.710 | Indicators: 0.241 | Unnamed: 3: 0.892
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: KNN (means)46 | Unnamed: 2: 0.676 | Indicators: 0.226 | Unnamed: 3: 0.879
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: 20-shot modelling | Unnamed: 1: SlopeOne47 | Unnamed: 2: 0.700 | Indicators: 0.233 | Unnamed: 3: 0.905
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: CoClustering48 | Unnamed: 2: 0.703 | Indicators: 0.235 | Unnamed: 3: 0.910
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: BookGPT | Unnamed: 2: 0.842 | Indicators: 0.248 | Unnamed: 3: 1.116
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 12]
average ranking results of each model to be obtained across multiple annotators. In addition, because LLMs such as ChatGPT
and Wenxin are optimized based on human instructions, people tend to choose longer answers as high-quality answers during
the optimization process, so if the summary size of the model is not controlled, the model tends to produce longer content
recommendation results. To ensure fairness during the comparison with the human summaries on Douban, we add summary
size restrictions to the prompt construction process, requiring that the summary recommendation results of the BookGPT and
Wenxin be as close as possible to the number of words in human summaries to ensure the validity of the comparison. Table 5
shows the results of manual evaluations of the content summary recommendations provided by the ChatGPT-based BookGPT
model and Wenxin for different book genres.
Table 5. The results obtained in the book summary recommendation task.
Size Models
Genres
Models All Novels Poems Essays Dramas
Score Length Score Length Score Length Score Length Score Length
Restricted size
Douban 2.05 300 2.07 323 2.09 360 2.14 255 1.88 237
Wenxin42 2.35 251 2.15 278 2.49 291 2.34 204 2.65 206
ChatGPT 3.5 1.60 129 1.79 178 1.42 94 1.53 112 1.47 84
Free size ChatGPT 3.5 1.45 314 1.48 280 1.53 370 1.40 309 1.39 329
Wenxin42 1.55 472 1.52 482 1.50 494 1.60 452 1.61 449
First, if we only compare the models based on the limited summary size, Wenxin achieves the best recommendation
performance among all the compared models, both in the subgenre and overall tasks. Compared with the human-written
summaries from Douban and the ChatGPT model summaries, Wenxin achieves relative improvements of 14.97% and 47.25%,
respectively.
Furthermore, although we limit and remind the models to pay attention to the number of characters during the prompt
construction process, it is apparent that Wenxin and ChatGPT have different understandings of the character limit requirement.
During the actual testing process, we find that ChatGPT is more conservative in terms of the character limit rule and usually
strictly follows the limit requirement, while Wenxin tends to produce longer summaries. In terms of the average character
lengths of the generated summaries, Wenxin exceeds ChatGPT by 94.57%. Based on this result, we believe that one of the
reasons for this is that Wenxin incorporates more Chinese language data into its training and fine-tuning processes and lacks
intervention during rule-based prompt fine-tuning, making the model more inclined to produce longer results (with stronger
expressions) for Chinese tasks. At the same time, this also indicates that Wenxin has a weaker sense of "rules".
Afterwards, we remove the character limit during the prompt building process, allowing the models to freely generate
summary recommendations based on their own capabilities. As shown in Table 5, compared to the results obtained with limited
character counts, the advantage of Wenxin over ChatGPT is reduced in the free-scale evaluation, with a relative improvement of
only 6.89% compared to ChatGPT, as opposed to 47.25% under the character limit. This result also suggests that the advantage
of Wenxin over ChatGPT under the character limit may be due to the production of longer summaries. However, in terms of
actual summary generation ability, Wenxin and ChatGPT are relatively close.
From the performance results obtained for different genres, it can be seen that the improvement exhibited by Wenxin over
the Human summaries on the "poems" and "drama" genres is more significant than that on the "novels" and "essays" genres.
Furthermore, if the summary sizes of the models are not limited, Wenxin and ChatGPT perform similarly on the "novels" and
"poems" genres, while Wenxin’s advantage is more obvious on the "essay" and "dramas" genres. However, regardless of the
genre, the performance of Wenxin is better than that of the human summaries on Douban.
Overall, in the book content summary recommendation task, the BookGPT based on LLMs has certain advantages over the
human-generated summaries on Douban and can provide relatively good improvements for different genres. However, we also
discover some issues, such as "fantasizing" and "piecing together" in some summary content. For example, when ChatGPT
produces the summary of a book named "Demi-Gods and Semi-Devils", it says, "The Legend of the Condor Heroes is one of
Jin Yong’s representative works, telling the adventure story in the background of the prosperous Tang Dynasty, and unfolding
a multi-linear narrative centered on the protagonist Chen Jialuo with ups and downs." For readers who are not familiar with
this book, the result seems reasonable, but in reality, this summary not only describes the wrong dynasty of the story but also
uses an incorrect name for the protagonist. In contrast, Wenxin is correct in terms of all key information. Therefore, it can be
seen that if one must achieve good fact description results and accuracy in a specific scenario, it is usually necessary to further
enhance the training process based on the corpus and prompt rules of that scenario. Otherwise, a model trained on a general
language corpus may easily fail to ensure the factual correctness of the generated content.

[TABLE page=12 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Score | Length | Score.1 | Length.1 | Score.2 | Length.2 | Score.3 | Length.3 | Score.4 | Length.4
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Douban | Score: 2.05 | Length: 300.0 | Score.1: 2.07 | Length.1: 323.0 | Score.2: 2.09 | Length.2: 360.0 | Score.3: 2.14 | Length.3: 255.0 | Score.4: 1.88 | Length.4: 237.0
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: Restricted size | Unnamed: 1: Wenxin42 | Score: 2.35 | Length: 251.0 | Score.1: 2.15 | Length.1: 278.0 | Score.2: 2.49 | Length.2: 291.0 | Score.3: 2.34 | Length.3: 204.0 | Score.4: 2.65 | Length.4: 206.0
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ChatGPT 3.5 | Score: 1.6 | Length: 129.0 | Score.1: 1.79 | Length.1: 178.0 | Score.2: 1.42 | Length.2: 94.0 | Score.3: 1.53 | Length.3: 112.0 | Score.4: 1.47 | Length.4: 84.0
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ChatGPT 3.5 | Score: 1.45 | Length: 314.0 | Score.1: 1.48 | Length.1: 280.0 | Score.2: 1.53 | Length.2: 370.0 | Score.3: 1.4 | Length.3: 309.0 | Score.4: 1.39 | Length.4: 329.0
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Free size | Unnamed: 1: | Score: | Length: | Score.1: | Length.1: | Score.2: | Length.2: | Score.3: | Length.3: | Score.4: | Length.4:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Wenxin42 | Score: 1.55 | Length: 472.0 | Score.1: 1.52 | Length.1: 482.0 | Score.2: 1.5 | Length.2: 494.0 | Score.3: 1.6 | Length.3: 452.0 | Score.4: 1.61 | Length.4: 449.0
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 13]
Conclusion and Future Work
This paper proposes a book recommendation framework called the BookGPT based on LLMs, which integrates the understanding
and reasoning abilities of LLMs into the classic scenario of book understanding and personalized recommendation in the LIS
field. By building a task definition, prompt engineering strategy, interactive querying method, and result verification framework,
the article explores the effects of LLM models on three typical subtasks of book recommendation: (1) the book rating task, (2)
the user-book preference recommendation task, and (3) the book summary recommendation task.
At the same time, an extensive comparative analysis is conducted based on different prompt sample quantity levels, including
zero-shot, one-few shot, and few-shot modelling with 10/20 samples. Finally, from the experimental results, the BookGPT can
achieve recommendation effects that are equal to or better than those of classic recommendation models in all three subtasks,
especially when the sample size is small, and it has a strong generalization ability. Additionally, as the number of prompt
samples increases, the model’s recommendation performance significantly improves.
In future work, we will further explore the following research directions concerning the applications of LLMs in LIS and
efficiency improvements.
Optimization through task-specific data fine-tuning. The current BookGPT framework is built directly on pretrained
LLMs such as ChatGPT and Wenxin, and its recommendation performance usually depends on the corpus during LLM training,
with a focus on the model’s generalization ability. It is not optimized for various proprietary scenarios in the LIS field. Therefore,
an important research direction for the future is how to construct training data for fine-tuning on specific domain scenarios to
further leverage the knowledge and reasoning advantages of LLMs, improve the recommendation and prediction performance
of the corresponding model, and even achieve better performance than that of the current state-of-the-art recommendation
models in domain-specific scenarios.
Combining user feedback with multiround conversation-based recommendation. In the current BookGPT recommendation paradigm, single-round offline recommendation is adopted, and no attention is paid to user feedback regarding
the recommendation effect (such as clicking, pressing the “favourite” button, and borrowing behaviour). Therefore, it is also
worth exploring how to integrate different real-time user behaviours and interactions with the system into the recommendation
paradigm and construct a multiround conversation-based recommendation model. Through multiround conversation-based
recommendation, not only can the contextual learning abilities of LLMs be maximized but also more training prompt language
materials can be generated from the interactions, which can improve the model’s training and fine-tuning results.
Incorporating personalized user info for explainable recommendations.Because LLMs are developed and trained based
on various natural language corpora, it is possible to incorporate more personalized user information into the recommendation
results and express them in a more "natural" form, rather than merely providing direct recommendations. For example, suppose
that a student majoring in history wants to search for books on "recommendation algorithms". If the system can account for
the reader’s major background attributes when recommending books and explain why a certain book is recommended from
a professional perspective, the common points or connections it may have with the reader’s major attributes, or what issues
need to be noted while reading, could this improve the user’s acceptance rate? Therefore, this optimization strategy based on
personalized and interpretable recommendations for users is also a very interesting research direction.
In summary, this article aims to explore the possibility of applying LLMs in the LIS field through empirical research and
evaluates their effectiveness in the typical book recommendation scenario. We hope that this study can inspire researchers to
analyse more opportunities for applying LLMs in similar tasks and further improve their performance in existing scenarios.
References
1. Zhao, W. X. et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 (2023).
2. OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
3. Dreibelbis, E. Chatgpt passes google coding interview for level 3 engineer with $183k salary. http://985.so/mny2k.
4. Lund, B. D. & Wang, T. Chatting about chatgpt: how may ai and gpt impact academia and libraries? Libr. Hi Tech News
(2023).
5. Cox, C. & Tzoc, E. Chatgpt: Implications for academic libraries. Coll. & Res. Libr. News 84, 99 (2023).
6. Verma, M. Novel study on ai-based chatbot (chatgpt) impacts on the traditional library management.
Int. J. Trend Sci. Res. Dev. 7 (2023).
7. Zhixiong, Z. et al. The influence of chatgpt on library & information services. Data Analysis Knowl. Discov. 7, 36–42
(2023).
8. Panda, S. & Kaur, N. Exploring the viability of chatgpt as an alternative to traditional chatbot systems in library and
information centers. Libr. Hi Tech News (2023).

[PAGE 14]
9. Kirtania, D. K. & Patra, S. K. Openai chatgpt generated content and similarity index: A study of selected terms from the
library & information science (lis). Qeios (2023).
10. Jelinek, F. Statistical methods for speech recognition (MIT press, 1998).
11. Rosenfeld, R. Two decades of statistical language modeling: Where do we go from here? Proc. IEEE 88, 1270–1278
(2000).
12. Liu, X. & Croft, W. B. Statistical language modeling. Annu. Rev. Inf. Sci. Technol. 39, 1 (2004).
13. Bengio, Y ., Ducharme, R. & Vincent, P. A neural probabilistic language model.
Adv. neural information processing systems 13 (2000).
14. Mikolov, T., Karafiát, M., Burget, L., Cernock`y, J. & Khudanpur, S. Recurrent neural network based language model. In
Interspeech, vol. 2, 1045–1048 (Makuhari, 2010).
15. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G. & Dean, J. Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
16. Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
17. Sarzynska-Wawer, J.et al. Detecting formal thought disorder by deep contextualized word representations. Psychiatry Res.
304, 114135 (2021).
18. Brown, T. et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Adv. neural information processing systems 33, 1877–1901
(2020).
19. Chowdhery, A. et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311 (2022).
20. Touvron, H. et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
21. Zeng, A. et al. GLM-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model. In
The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2023).
22. Vaswani, A. et al. Attention is all you need. Adv. neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
23. Saravia, E. Prompt Engineering Guide. https://www.promptingguide.ai (2022).
24. Wei, J. et al. Emergent abilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682 (2022).
25. Jiang, H. A latent space theory for emergent abilities in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09960 (2023).
26. Lampinen, A. K. et al. Can language models learn from explanations in context? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02329 (2022).
27. Wei, J. et al. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903
(2022).
28. George, A. S. & George, A. H. A review of chatgpt ai’s impact on several business sectors. Partners Univers. Int. Innov. J.
1, 9–23 (2023).
29. Lu, Q., Qiu, B., Ding, L., Xie, L. & Tao, D. Error analysis prompting enables human-like translation evaluation in large
language models: A case study on chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13809 (2023).
30. Shafeeg, A., Shazhaev, I., Mihaylov, D., Tularov, A. & Shazhaev, I. V oice assistant integrated with chat gpt.
Indonesian J. Comput. Sci. 12 (2023).
31. Tewari, A. S. & Priyanka, K. Book recommendation system based on collaborative filtering and association rule mining for
college students. In 2014 International Conference on Contemporary Computing and Informatics (IC3I), 135–138 (IEEE,
2014).
32. Bellogín, A., Castells, P. & Cantador, I. Neighbor selection and weighting in user-based collaborative filtering: a
performance prediction approach. ACM Transactions on Web (TWEB)8, 1–30 (2014).
33. Linden, G., Smith, B. & York, J. Amazon. com recommendations: Item-to-item collaborative filtering.
IEEE Internet computing 7, 76–80 (2003).
34. Rajpurkar, S., Bhatt, D., Malhotra, P., Rajpurkar, M. & Bhatt, M. Book recommendation system.
Int. J. for Innov. Res. Sci. & Technol. 1, 314–316 (2015).
35. Xu, C. A novel recommendation method based on social network using matrix factorization technique.
Inf. processing & management 54, 463–474 (2018).

[PAGE 15]
36. Dien, T. T., Thanh-Hai, N. & Thai-Nghe, N. An approach for learning resource recommendation using deep matrix
factorization. J. Inf. Telecommun. 6, 381–398 (2022).
37. Lipton, Z. C., Berkowitz, J. & Elkan, C. A critical review of recurrent neural networks for sequence learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.00019 (2015).
38. Wu, S., Sun, F., Zhang, W., Xie, X. & Cui, B. Graph neural networks in recommender systems: a survey.
ACM Comput. Surv. 55, 1–37 (2022).
39. Ma, C. et al. Memory augmented graph neural networks for sequential recommendation. In
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 34, 5045–5052 (2020).
40. Wang, X. et al. Learning intents behind interactions with knowledge graph for recommendation. In
Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, 878–887 (2021).
41. Liu, V . & Chilton, L. B. Design guidelines for prompt engineering text-to-image generative models. In
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–23 (2022).
42. Baidu. Wenxin yiyan. https://yiyan.baidu.com/welcome.
43. Wang, Y ., Wang, L., Li, Y ., He, D. & Liu, T.-Y . A theoretical analysis of ndcg type ranking measures. In
Conference on learning theory, 25–54 (PMLR, 2013).
44. Zajac, Z. Goodbooks-10k: a new dataset for book recommendations. FastML (2017).
45. Mnih, A. & Salakhutdinov, R. R. Probabilistic matrix factorization. Adv. neural information processing systems 20
(2007).
46. Koren, Y . Factor in the neighbors: Scalable and accurate collaborative filtering.
ACM Transactions on Knowl. Discov. from Data (TKDD) 4, 1–24 (2010).
47. Lemire, D. & Maclachlan, A. Slope one predictors for online rating-based collaborative filtering. In
Proceedings of the 2005 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, 471–475 (SIAM, 2005).
48. George, T. & Merugu, S. A scalable collaborative filtering framework based on co-clustering. In
Fifth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’05), 4–pp (IEEE, 2005).