[PAGE 1]
Thrilled by Your Progress!
Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer Struggle to Pass
Assessments in Higher Education Programming Courses
Jaromir Savelka
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
jsavelka@cs.cmu.edu
Arav Agarwal
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
arava@andrew.cmu.edu
Marshall An
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
haokanga@andrew.cmu.edu
Chris Bogart
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
cbogart@andrew.cmu.edu
Majd Sakr
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
msakr@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper studies recent developments in large language models’
(LLM) abilities to pass assessments in introductory and intermediate Python programming courses at the postsecondary level. The
emergence of ChatGPT resulted in heated debates of its potential
uses (e.g., exercise generation, code explanation) as well as misuses
in programming classes (e.g., cheating). Recent studies show that
while the technology performs surprisingly well on diverse sets of
assessment instruments employed in typical programming classes
the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The
release of GPT-4 largely emphasized notable improvements in the
capabilities related to handling assessments originally designed
for human test-takers. This study is the necessary analysis in the
context of this ongoing transition towards mature generative AI
systems. Specifically, we report the performance of GPT-4, comparing it to the previous generations of GPT models, on three Python
courses with assessments ranging from simple multiple-choice questions (no code involved) to complex programming projects with
code bases distributed into multiple files (599 exercises overall).
Additionally, we analyze the assessments that were not handled
well by GPT-4 to understand the current limitations of the model,
as well as its capabilities to leverage feedback provided by an autograder. We found that the GPT models evolved from completely
failing the typical programming class’ assessments (the original
GPT-3) to confidently passing the courses with no human involvement (GPT-4). While we identified certain limitations in GPT-4’s
handling of MCQs and coding exercises, the rate of improvement
across the recent generations of GPT models strongly suggests their
potential to handle almost any type of assessment widely used in
higher education programming courses. These findings could be
leveraged by educators and institutions to adapt the design of programming assessments as well as to fuel the necessary discussions
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9976-0/23/08.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3568813.3600142
into how programming classes should be updated to reflect the
recent technological developments. This study provides evidence
that programming instructors need to prepare for a world in which
there is an easy-to-use widely accessible technology that can be
utilized by learners to collect passing scores, with no effort whatsoever, on what today counts as viable programming knowledge and
skills assessments.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Social and professional topics → Computing education ;
Student assessment; •Computing methodologies → Artificial
intelligence; Natural language processing .
KEYWORDS
AI code generation, introductory and intermediate programming,
Multiple-choice question answering, MCQ, coding exercises, generative pre-trained transformers, GPT, Python course, programming
knowledge assessment, ChatGPT, Codex, GitHub Copilot, AlphaCode
ACM Reference Format:
Jaromir Savelka, Arav Agarwal, Marshall An, Chris Bogart, and Majd Sakr.
2023. Thrilled by Your Progress! Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer
Struggle to Pass Assessments in Higher Education Programming Courses.
In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research V.1 (ICER ’23 V1), August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3568813.3600142
1 INTRODUCTION
Rapidly increasing capabilities of large language models (LLM) keep
challenging established practices in various contexts, including
computer science and information technology (CS/IT) education.
There are important unanswered questions related to (i) curricular changes needed to accommodate the new reality, (ii) excessive
learners’ reliance on LLMs in engaging with learning materials, assignments, and assessments, as well as (iii) considerable uncertainty
as to how the future of CS/IT profession(al)s look like. Hence, the
all-important concern shared by many CS/IT educators as to what
are the skills and knowledge the learners in CS/IT programs need
in order to have successful and meaningful careers. Perhaps, a more
immediate question that likely occupies minds of many instructors
arXiv:2306.10073v1 [cs.CY] 15 Jun 2023

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: ate Python programming courses at the postsecondary level. The | there is an easy-to-use widely accessible technology that can be
Row 1: ate Python programming courses at the postsecondary level. The: emergence of ChatGPT resulted in heated debates of its potential | there is an easy-to-use widely accessible technology that can be: utilized by learners to collect passing scores, with no effort whatso-
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=1 index=2]
Columns: This paper studies recent developments in large language models’ | recent technological developments. This study provides evidence
Row 1: This paper studies recent developments in large language models’: (LLM) abilities to pass assessments in introductory and intermedi- | recent technological developments. This study provides evidence: that programming instructors need to prepare for a world in which
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=1 index=3]
Columns: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;
Row 1: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: release of GPT-4 largely emphasized notable improvements in the | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: Student assessment; • Computing methodologies→ Artificial
Row 2: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: capabilities related to handling assessments originally designed | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: intelligence; Natural language processing.
Row 3: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: for human test-takers. This study is the necessary analysis in the | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;:
Row 4: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: context of this ongoing transition towards mature generative AI | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: KEYWORDS
Row 5: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: systems. Specifically, we report the performance of GPT-4, compar- | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: AI code generation, introductory and intermediate programming,
Row 6: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: ing it to the previous generations of GPT models, on three Python | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: Multiple-choice question answering, MCQ, coding exercises, generRow 7: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: courses with assessments ranging from simplemultiple-choice ques- | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: ative pre-trained transformers, GPT, Python course, programming
Row 8: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: tions (no code involved) to complex programming projects with | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: knowledge assessment, ChatGPT, Codex, GitHub Copilot, AlphaRow 9: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: code bases distributed into multiple files (599 exercises overall). | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: Code
Row 10: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: Additionally, we analyze the assessments that were not handled | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;:
Row 11: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: well by GPT-4 to understand the current limitations of the model, | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: ACM Reference Format:
Row 12: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: as well as its capabilities to leverage feedback provided by an auto- | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;:
Row 13: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: Jaromir Savelka, Arav Agarwal, Marshall An, Chris Bogart, and Majd Sakr.
Row 14: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: 2023. Thrilled by Your Progress! Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer
Row 15: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: grader. We found that the GPT models evolved from completely | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: Struggle to Pass Assessments in Higher Education Programming Courses.
Row 16: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: failing the typical programming class’ assessments (the original | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on International Computing EduRow 17: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: GPT-3) to confidently passing the courses with no human involve- | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: cation Research V.1 (ICER ’23 V1), August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA. ACM,
Row 18: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: ment (GPT-4). While we identified certain limitations in GPT-4’s | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3568813.3600142
Row 19: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: handling of MCQs and coding exercises, the rate of improvement | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;:
Row 20: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: across the recent generations of GPT models strongly suggests their | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: 1 INTRODUCTION
Row 21: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: potential to handle almost any type of assessment widely used in | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: Rapidly increasing capabilities of large language models (LLM) keep
Row 22: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: higher education programming courses. These findings could be | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: challenging established practices in various contexts, including
Row 23: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: leveraged by educators and institutions to adapt the design of pro- | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: computer science and information technology (CS/IT) education.
Row 24: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: gramming assessments as well as to fuel the necessary discussions | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: There are important unanswered questions related to (i) curricuRow 25: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: lar changes needed to accommodate the new reality, (ii) excessive
Row 26: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: learners’ reliance on LLMs in engaging with learning materials, asRow 27: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: signments, and assessments, as well as (iii) considerable uncertainty
Row 28: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;:
Row 29: the performance is usually not sufficient to pass the courses. The: on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. | • Social and professional topics → Computing education;: as to how the future of CS/IT profession(al)s look like. Hence, the
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA Savelka et al.
is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of
ubiquitous tools (e.g., ChatGPT,1 GitHub Copilot2) that could be
easily utilized to pass the assessments (at least partially).
While it is difficult to provide definitive or even satisfactory
answers to questions posed above it is of utmost importance to
build and maintain a body of empirically validated knowledge that
would facilitate deep and meaningful discussions on these topics.
Indeed, there has been a growing body of scholarship focused on
understanding the capabilities of LLMs, as well as their limitations,
in the context of programming education (see Section 2). The recent release of GPT-4 poses a challenge for the existing work that
needs to be confirmed or updated to account for this seemingly
more powerful technology. The issue is especially pressing when
it comes to what we know about the capabilities of GPT models
to handle assessments that were originally designed for a human
test-taker. This is because GPT-4 appears to perform much better on
academic and professional exams when compared to the preceding
GPT-3.5 generation. The technical report [35] made available with
the GPT-4 release lists 34 such exams, including various Graduate Record Examination (GRE) tests, 3 SAT Math,4 or a Uniform
Bar Exam.5 Several of the listed exams involve programming tasks
(e.g., Leetcode,6 Codeforces Rating7) and those too show notably
improved performance. Hence, it appears that the current knowledge of the capabilities of the GPT models to handle assessments
in programming courses might be outdated.
This paper analyzes the capabilities of the newest state of the
art generative pre-trained transformer (GPT-4) to pass typical assessments, i.e., multiple-choice question (MCQ) tests and coding
exercises, in introductory and intermediate programming courses.
The aim of this paper is to quickly react to the recent release of
GPT-4 and assess if and to what extent do the findings presented
by similar past studies performed with GPT-3 and 3.5 models still
stand. Hence, the focus is not only on the performance of GPT-4
but also on the comparison of its performance to that of the earlier GPT models. To that end we employ a data set comprising of
599 assessments from three currently running Python courses. We
asses the outputs of the GPT models as if they were coming from
a human learner. This means that we also expose the models to a
feedback generated by an auto-grader and provide them with an
opportunity to iterate on the solution. This is all done in a manner
ensuring that there is no human intervention that could contribute
to models successfully passing the assessments. This approach allows us to accurately gauge if the automatically generated solutions
would enable a human learner to pass a course provided it would
have been their own work. The immediate insight that this study
offers is that the danger of learners’ over-reliance on GPT models
1OpenAI: ChatGPT. Available at: https://chat.openai.com/ [Accessed 2023-03-20]
2GitHub Copilot: Your AI pair programmer. Available at: https://github.com/features/
copilot [Accessed 2023-03-20]
3ETS: The GRE General Test. Available at: https://www.ets.org/gre/test-takers/generaltest/about.html [Accessed 2023-03-20]
4SAT Suite of Assessments. Available at: https://satsuite.collegeboard.org/sat/whatson-the-test/math [Accessed 2023-03-20]
5NCBE: Uniform Bar Examination. Available at: https://www.ncbex.org/exams/ube/
[Accessed 2023-03-20]
6LeetCode. Available at: https://leetcode.com/ [Accessed 2023-03-22]
7Codeforces. Available at: https://codeforces.com/contests [Accessed 2023-03-22]
when completing their programming courses’ assignments and
assessments is a real concern that has to be taken seriously.
To investigate if and how GPT-4 challenges the findings of the
prior works related to the capabilities of LLMs to handle diverse
types of assessments typically employed in real-world introductory and intermediate Python programming courses at the postsecondary level, we analyzed the following research questions from
the prior work in light of the newly released model:
(RQ1) To what degree can GPT-4 generate correct answers to MCQs
in order to pass an introductory or intermediate course in
Python in higher education? [45, 46]
(RQ2) Does GPT-4 struggle with programming MCQs containing
code snippets that require multi-hop reasoning? [45]
(RQ3) To what degree can GPT-4 produce solutions to complex
coding tasks from instructions in order to pass an introductory or intermediate course in Python in higher education?
[7, 10, 11, 38, 46]
(RQ4) Can GPT-4 successfully utilize feedback to fix solutions of
coding tasks? [46]
By carrying out this work, we provide the following contributions to the CS education research community. To our best knowledge, this is the first comprehensive study that:
(C1) Measures performance of the GPT-4 model on diverse assessment instruments from Python programming courses,
updating and extending the current body of knowledge that
has been developed on experiments with GPT-3 models.
(C2) Offers a detailed in-depth analysis of common properties
of MCQs and coding tasks that are answered incorrectly by
GPT-4.
2 RELATED WORK
GPT-4. Given the recent arrival of GPT-4, there have been few
studies of the implications of the new model in education as of the
writing of this paper. OpenAI’s technical report states performance
of GPT-4 on numerous tasks across diverse domains. Of particular
importance are the 92.0% success rate of GPT-4 on grade-school
mathematics questions using 5-shot examples and chain-of-thought
prompting, solving 31/41 Leetcode easy and 21/80 Leetcode medium
exercises, and significant success across several quantitative AP
and competitive mathematics exams [35]. Katz et al. demonstrate
that GPT-4 achieves 297 points on the Uniform Bar Exam (UBE),
passing the bar exam and, in the authors words “by a significant
margin” [18]. Lastly, Jiao et al. consider the performance of GPT-4
on academic translation tasks, demonstrating that the ChatGPT
service achieves significantly better performance compared to existing commercial translation products [16]. This paper falls in line
with such work, conducting a rigorous evaluation of the recentlyreleased GPT-4 model when applied to typical introductory and
intermediate programming assessments. We demonstrate that the
gains in performance observed in other domains extend to the
programming education as well.
GPT Performance on Programming MCQs. Savelka et al.
evaluated the capability of text-davinci-003, to pass a diverse
set of assessment instruments, including MCQs, in the realistic context of full-fledged programming courses [46]. They found that the

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and
Row 1: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: ubiquitous tools (e.g., ChatGPT,1 GitHub Copilot2) that could be | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: assessments is a real concern that has to be taken seriously.
Row 2: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: easily utilized to pass the assessments (at least partially). | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: To investigate if and how GPT-4 challenges the findings of the
Row 3: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: While it is difficult to provide definitive or even satisfactory | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: prior works related to the capabilities of LLMs to handle diverse
Row 4: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: answers to questions posed above it is of utmost importance to | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: types of assessments typically employed in real-world introducRow 5: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: build and maintain a body of empirically validated knowledge that | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: tory and intermediate Python programming courses at the postRow 6: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: would facilitate deep and meaningful discussions on these topics. | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: secondary level, we analyzed the following research questions from
Row 7: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: Indeed, there has been a growing body of scholarship focused on | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: the prior work in light of the newly released model:
Row 8: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: understanding the capabilities of LLMs, as well as their limitations, | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 9: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: in the context of programming education (see Section 2). The re- | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: (RQ1) Towhat degree can GPT-4 generate correct answers toMCQs
Row 10: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: cent release of GPT-4 poses a challenge for the existing work that | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: in order to pass an introductory or intermediate course in
Row 11: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: needs to be confirmed or updated to account for this seemingly | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: Python in higher education? [45, 46]
Row 12: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: more powerful technology. The issue is especially pressing when | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: (RQ2) Does GPT-4 struggle with programming MCQs containing
Row 13: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: it comes to what we know about the capabilities of GPT models | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: code snippets that require multi-hop reasoning? [45]
Row 14: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: to handle assessments that were originally designed for a human | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: (RQ3) To what degree can GPT-4 produce solutions to complex
Row 15: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: test-taker. This is because GPT-4 appears to performmuch better on | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: coding tasks from instructions in order to pass an introducRow 16: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: academic and professional exams when compared to the preceding | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: tory or intermediate course in Python in higher education?
Row 17: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: GPT-3.5 generation. The technical report [35] made available with | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: [7, 10, 11, 38, 46]
Row 18: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: the GPT-4 release lists 34 such exams, including various Gradu- | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: (RQ4) Can GPT-4 successfully utilize feedback to fix solutions of
Row 19: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: ate Record Examination (GRE) tests,3 SAT Math,4 or a Uniform | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: coding tasks? [46]
Row 20: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: Bar Exam.5 Several of the listed exams involve programming tasks | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: By carrying out this work, we provide the following contribuRow 21: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: (e.g., Leetcode,6 Codeforces Rating7) and those too show notably | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: tions to the CS education research community. To our best knowlRow 22: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: improved performance. Hence, it appears that the current knowl- | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: edge, this is the first comprehensive study that:
Row 23: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: edge of the capabilities of the GPT models to handle assessments | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 24: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: in programming courses might be outdated. | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 25: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: (C1) Measures performance of the GPT-4 model on diverse asRow 26: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: This paper analyzes the capabilities of the newest state of the | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 27: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: sessment instruments from Python programming courses,
Row 28: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: art generative pre-trained transformer (GPT-4) to pass typical as- | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 29: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: updating and extending the current body of knowledge that
Row 30: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: sessments, i.e., multiple-choice question (MCQ) tests and coding | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 31: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: has been developed on experiments with GPT-3 models.
Row 32: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: exercises, in introductory and intermediate programming courses. | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 33: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: (C2) Offers a detailed in-depth analysis of common properties
Row 34: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: The aim of this paper is to quickly react to the recent release of | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 35: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: of MCQs and coding tasks that are answered incorrectly by
Row 36: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: GPT-4 and assess if and to what extent do the findings presented | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 37: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: GPT-4.
Row 38: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: by similar past studies performed with GPT-3 and 3.5 models still | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and:
Row 39: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: stand. Hence, the focus is not only on the performance of GPT-4 | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: 2 RELATED WORK
Row 40: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: but also on the comparison of its performance to that of the ear- | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: GPT-4. Given the recent arrival of GPT-4, there have been few
Row 41: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: lier GPT models. To that end we employ a data set comprising of | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: studies of the implications of the new model in education as of the
Row 42: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: 599 assessments from three currently running Python courses. We | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: writing of this paper. OpenAI’s technical report states performance
Row 43: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: asses the outputs of the GPT models as if they were coming from | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: of GPT-4 on numerous tasks across diverse domains. Of particular
Row 44: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: a human learner. This means that we also expose the models to a | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: importance are the 92.0% success rate of GPT-4 on grade-school
Row 45: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: feedback generated by an auto-grader and provide them with an | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: mathematics questions using 5-shot examples and chain-of-thought
Row 46: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: opportunity to iterate on the solution. This is all done in a manner | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: prompting, solving 31/41 Leetcode easy and 21/80 Leetcode medium
Row 47: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: ensuring that there is no human intervention that could contribute | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: exercises, and significant success across several quantitative AP
Row 48: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: to models successfully passing the assessments. This approach al- | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: and competitive mathematics exams [35]. Katz et al. demonstrate
Row 49: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: lows us to accurately gauge if the automatically generated solutions | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: that GPT-4 achieves 297 points on the Uniform Bar Exam (UBE),
Row 50: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: would enable a human learner to pass a course provided it would | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: passing the bar exam and, in the authors words “by a significant
Row 51: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: have been their own work. The immediate insight that this study | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: margin” [18]. Lastly, Jiao et al. consider the performance of GPT-4
Row 52: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: offers is that the danger of learners’ over-reliance on GPT models | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: on academic translation tasks, demonstrating that the ChatGPT
Row 53: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: service achieves significantly better performance compared to exRow 54: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: isting commercial translation products [16]. This paper falls in line
Row 55: is how to assess learners’ skills and knowledge in the presence of: 1OpenAI: ChatGPT. Available at: https://chat.openai.com/ [Accessed 2023-03-20] | when completing their programming courses’ assignments and: with such work, conducting a rigorous evaluation of the recently-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer Struggle to Pass Assessments ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA
then current GPT models were not capable of passing the full spectrum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming
course (below 70% on even entry-level modules); but a straightforward application of these models could enable a learner to obtain
a non-trivial portion of the overall available score (over 55%) in
introductory and intermediate courses alike. They also observed
that an important limitation of the GPT models was their apparent
struggle with activities that required multi-hop reasoning, and that
there appeared to be a difference in success rate between MCQs
that contained a code snippet and those that did not [ 45, 46]. In
this work, we re-examine those findings in the light of the more
powerful model released since their publication. We find that the
conclusions about the models not being able to pass the courses
no longer hold. However, some of the limitations identified in the
prior work still hold.
GPT Performance on MCQs in Other Domains. Robinson
et al. apply InstructGPT [36] and Codex to OpenBookQA [31], StoryCloze [33], and RACE-m [23] data sets which focus on multi-hop
reasoning, recall, and reading comprehension, reporting 77.4-89.2%
accuracy [43]. In some cases, GPT can generate code when applied to programming assignments in higher education courses.
Drori and Verma used Codex to write Python programs to solve
60 computational linear algebra MCQs, reporting 100% accuracy
[9]. Others have used GPT models to solve various MCQ-based
exams, including the United States Medical Licensing Examination
(USMLE), with accuracy around 50% [13, 22, 27], the Multistate Bar
Examination (MBE) [3, 18], and the American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants’ (AICPA) Regulation (REG) exam [2]. Although,
GPT can often answer questions about systems and rules, it is especially challenged by tasks that involveapplying them and reasoning
about their implications in novel examples. Hendryks et al. created
data set that includes a wide variety of MCQs across STEM, humanities and arts, with GPT-3 performing at levels above 50% for
subjects such as marketing and foreign policy, but below 30% for
topics such as formal logic [ 14]. They found that the model performed particularly poorly in quantitative subjects. For example,
in Elementary Mathematics they note that GPT can answer questions about arithmetic order of operations (e.g., that multiplications
are performed before additions), but it cannot correctly answer
questions that require applying this concept. They also note that
GPT performance is not necessarily correlated with how advanced
the topic is for humans, doing better at College Mathematics than
Elementary Mathematics. Finally, they noted that GPT does poorly
on tests of legal and moral reasoning [ 14]. Lu et al. studied GPT
models’ performance on a large data set consisting of 21,208 MCQs
on topics in natural science, social science, and language [28]. They
prompted the models to produce an explanation along with its answer and reported 1-3% improvement in accuracy (74.04%). In this
work, we do not adopt the approach and, hence, leave space for
future work as it appears quite promising and definitely applicable
in the context of programming MCQs.
GPT Performance on Coding Assessments. There is a growing body of related work on GPT models’ capabilities in solving
educational programming tasks by generating code and text. FinnieAnsley et al. evaluated Codex on 23 programming tasks used as
summative assessments in a CS1 [10] and CS2 [11] programming
courses. Denny et al. focused on the effects of prompt engineering
when applying Copilot to a set of 166 exercises from the publicly
available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the performance of ChatGPT on content from five chapters of software
testing curricula, reporting a 55.6% accuracy in their assessment
[15]. Our paper extends the existing body of work, most importantly by using the more powerful GPT-4 model. Piccolo et al. used
184 programming exercises from an introductory bioinformatics
course to evaluate the extent to which ChatGPT can successfully
complete basic to moderate level programming tasks, reporting
the success rate of 75.5% on the first attempt and 97.3% when provided with feedback [ 38]. Several studies focus on collaboration
between a human learner and GPT-based assisting tools (e.g., Copilot). Kazemitabaar et al. studied learners using OpenAI’s Codex
during traditional code creation tasks, and demonstrated the use of
Codex did not harm their performance, with experienced students
performing significantly better [ 19]. Leinonen et al. used Codex
to generate more readable error messages for learners to use for
project-level debugging, suggesting that model-created explanations can serve as effective scaffolding for students learning to
program [25]. Prather et al. examined how novices interact with
these tools, observing that novices struggle to understand and use
Copilot [39].
GPT and Computing Education. Besides the work focused on
how well LLMs do in various tasks meant to be performed by human
learners, there is also a growing body of work on using LLMs to support computing education. Sarsa et al. used code-davinci-001 to
generate 240 introductory programming exercises, along with tests,
sample solutions and explanations, reporting that over 75% of the
generated exercises were novel and suitable for use in a university
setting [44]. Macneil et al. integrated LLM-generated code explanations into an interactive e-book and compared several different
explanation types, such as line-by-line or summarization-oriented
explanations, reporting students using line-by-line explanations
the most despite them being considered the least useful according
to the students [ 29]. Leinonen et al. compared learner-authored
code explanations with those generated by GPT-3, showing that
students perceived GPT-3 generated explanations as more readable
of the two [24].
GPT Performance on Coding Tasks in Professional Settings. Outside of the educational context, there have been studies
exploring GPT’s capabilities on competitive and interview programming tasks. Chen et al. released the HumanEval data set where
Codex achieved 28.8% success rate on the first attempt and 72.3%
when allowed 100 attempts [6]. Li et al. report Deepmind’s AlphaCode performance on Codeforces competitions,8 achieving a 54.3%
ranking amongst 5,000 participants [26]. Karmakar et al. reported
96% pass rate for Codex on a data set of 115 programming problems from HackerRank9 [17]. Nguyen and Nadi reported Copilot’s
effectiveness on LeetCode10 problems, achieving 42% accuracy [34].
Perry et al. explored the security implications of using Copilot [37].
Program code does more than control computer execution; it
also, some argue primarily, serves as communication among developers [20]. Since GPT is a text prediction model trained on code in
8Codeforces. Available at: https://codeforces.com/contests [Accessed 2023-01-22]
9HackerRank. Available at: https://www.hackerrank.com/ [Accessed 2023-01-22]
10LeetCode. Available at: https://leetcode.com/ [Accessed 2023-01-22]

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the perRow 1: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: course (below 70% on even entry-level modules); but a straightfor- | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: formance of ChatGPT on content from five chapters of software
Row 2: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: ward application of these models could enable a learner to obtain | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: testing curricula, reporting a 55.6% accuracy in their assessment
Row 3: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: a non-trivial portion of the overall available score (over 55%) in | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: [15]. Our paper extends the existing body of work, most imporRow 4: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: introductory and intermediate courses alike. They also observed | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: tantly by using the more powerful GPT-4 model. Piccolo et al. used
Row 5: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: that an important limitation of the GPT models was their apparent | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: 184 programming exercises from an introductory bioinformatics
Row 6: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: struggle with activities that required multi-hop reasoning, and that | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: course to evaluate the extent to which ChatGPT can successfully
Row 7: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: there appeared to be a difference in success rate between MCQs | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: complete basic to moderate level programming tasks, reporting
Row 8: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: that contained a code snippet and those that did not [45, 46]. In | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: the success rate of 75.5% on the first attempt and 97.3% when proRow 9: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: this work, we re-examine those findings in the light of the more | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: vided with feedback [38]. Several studies focus on collaboration
Row 10: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: powerful model released since their publication. We find that the | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: between a human learner and GPT-based assisting tools (e.g., CopiRow 11: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: conclusions about the models not being able to pass the courses | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: lot). Kazemitabaar et al. studied learners using OpenAI’s Codex
Row 12: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: no longer hold. However, some of the limitations identified in the | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: during traditional code creation tasks, and demonstrated the use of
Row 13: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: prior work still hold. | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: Codex did not harm their performance, with experienced students
Row 14: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: GPT Performance on MCQs in Other Domains. Robinson | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: performing significantly better [19]. Leinonen et al. used Codex
Row 15: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: et al. apply InstructGPT [36] and Codex to OpenBookQA [31], Sto- | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: to generate more readable error messages for learners to use for
Row 16: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: ryCloze [33], and RACE-m [23] data sets which focus on multi-hop | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: project-level debugging, suggesting that model-created explanaRow 17: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: reasoning, recall, and reading comprehension, reporting 77.4-89.2% | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: tions can serve as effective scaffolding for students learning to
Row 18: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: accuracy [43]. In some cases, GPT can generate code when ap- | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: program [25]. Prather et al. examined how novices interact with
Row 19: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: plied to programming assignments in higher education courses. | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: these tools, observing that novices struggle to understand and use
Row 20: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: Drori and Verma used Codex to write Python programs to solve | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: Copilot [39].
Row 21: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: 60 computational linear algebra MCQs, reporting 100% accuracy | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: GPT and Computing Education. Besides the work focused on
Row 22: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: [9]. Others have used GPT models to solve various MCQ-based | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: howwell LLMs do in various tasksmeant to be performed by human
Row 23: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: exams, including the United States Medical Licensing Examination | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: learners, there is also a growing body of work on using LLMs to supRow 24: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: (USMLE), with accuracy around 50% [13, 22, 27], the Multistate Bar | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: port computing education. Sarsa et al. used code-davinci-001 to
Row 25: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: Examination (MBE) [3, 18], and the American Institute of Certified | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: generate 240 introductory programming exercises, along with tests,
Row 26: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: Public Accountants’ (AICPA) Regulation (REG) exam [2]. Although, | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: sample solutions and explanations, reporting that over 75% of the
Row 27: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: GPT can often answer questions about systems and rules, it is espe- | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: generated exercises were novel and suitable for use in a university
Row 28: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: cially challenged by tasks that involve applying them and reasoning | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: setting [44]. Macneil et al. integrated LLM-generated code explaRow 29: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: about their implications in novel examples. Hendryks et al. created | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: nations into an interactive e-book and compared several different
Row 30: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: data set that includes a wide variety of MCQs across STEM, hu- | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: explanation types, such as line-by-line or summarization-oriented
Row 31: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: manities and arts, with GPT-3 performing at levels above 50% for | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: explanations, reporting students using line-by-line explanations
Row 32: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: subjects such as marketing and foreign policy, but below 30% for | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: the most despite them being considered the least useful according
Row 33: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: topics such as formal logic [14]. They found that the model per- | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: to the students [29]. Leinonen et al. compared learner-authored
Row 34: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: formed particularly poorly in quantitative subjects. For example, | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: code explanations with those generated by GPT-3, showing that
Row 35: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: in Elementary Mathematics they note that GPT can answer ques- | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: students perceived GPT-3 generated explanations as more readable
Row 36: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: tions about arithmetic order of operations (e.g., that multiplications | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: of the two [24].
Row 37: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: are performed before additions), but it cannot correctly answer | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: GPT Performance on Coding Tasks in Professional SetRow 38: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: questions that require applying this concept. They also note that | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: tings. Outside of the educational context, there have been studies
Row 39: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: GPT performance is not necessarily correlated with how advanced | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: exploring GPT’s capabilities on competitive and interview programRow 40: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: the topic is for humans, doing better at College Mathematics than | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: ming tasks. Chen et al. released the HumanEval data set where
Row 41: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: Elementary Mathematics. Finally, they noted that GPT does poorly | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: Codex achieved 28.8% success rate on the first attempt and 72.3%
Row 42: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: on tests of legal and moral reasoning [14]. Lu et al. studied GPT | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: when allowed 100 attempts [6]. Li et al. report Deepmind’s AlphaRow 43: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: models’ performance on a large data set consisting of 21,208 MCQs | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: Code performance on Codeforces competitions,8 achieving a 54.3%
Row 44: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: on topics in natural science, social science, and language [28]. They | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: ranking amongst 5,000 participants [26]. Karmakar et al. reported
Row 45: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: prompted the models to produce an explanation along with its an- | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: 96% pass rate for Codex on a data set of 115 programming probRow 46: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: swer and reported 1-3% improvement in accuracy (74.04%). In this | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: lems from HackerRank9 [17]. Nguyen and Nadi reported Copilot’s
Row 47: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: work, we do not adopt the approach and, hence, leave space for | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: effectiveness on LeetCode10 problems, achieving 42% accuracy [34].
Row 48: trum of assessments typically involved in a Python programming: future work as it appears quite promising and definitely applicable | available CodeCheck repository [7]. Jalil et al. evaluated the per-: Perry et al. explored the security implications of using Copilot [37].
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA Savelka et al.
the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representation of code is likely to capture code’sdesign intent more strongly
than code’s formal properties . For example, work from multiple
studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily
on function names and input variables [32, 49]. Although, models
like GPT are not trained to simulate code execution, they can in
many cases generate code based on natural language description
of the code’s intent. Researchers have reported varying success at
generating code in response to programming assignments, ranging from Codex’s 100% success generating Python computational
linear algebra programs [9], to 78.3% on some CS1 programming
problems [10], to 79% on the CodeCheck 11 repository of Python
programming problems [7].
Prompt Engineering. It has been well established that LLMs
are few-shot learners, capable of answering questions without additional fine-tuning in a zero-shot fashion [4]. In general, finding the
best prompt for a specific task is challenging, with prompts that
are semantically similar sometimes providing large differences in
performance [51]. Despite this difficulty, there have been several
advancements in developing techniques for prompt engineering to
improve the performance of LLMs. Numerous studies have explored
prompts which include a number of examples to demonstrate what
the desired output should be [4, 12, 50]. However, the current research literature remains inconclusive as to the efficacy of adding
examples to natural language prompts, with multiple studies suggesting that the order and number of examples can dramatically
influence the performance of LLMs across various tasks [42, 50].
In introductory CS context, there has been an inquiry into explainable prompt-engineering practices. Denny et al. explored prompting Copilot for CS1 exercises, demonstrating that while prompt
engineering can significantly improve the performance of Copilot
on CS1 problems, verbose prompts can lead to decreases in model
performance [7]. Similar study has been performed on CS2 coding
tasks [11].
More recently, there has been significant interest in chain of
thought prompting, a technique where an LLM is asked to provide
both the answer and the reasoning that lead to the answer in question. This has lead to significant performance gains in symbolic and
quantitative reasoning tasks, by forcing the LLM to emulate human
reasoning in addition to the answer itself [48]. Recently, researchers
have also explored the so called “least-to-most” prompting, where
a task is decomposed into several sub-problems, which are then
answered all at once by the model [52].
3 DATA
For the purpose of this study, we obtained the data set that was
originally used in [45, 46]. The researchers collected assessment
exercises from three real-world currently running Python programming courses.
Python Essentials - Part 1 (Basics) 12 (PE1) transitions learners
from a state of complete programming illiteracy to a level of programming knowledge which allows them to design, write, debug,
11CodeCheck: Python Exercises. Available at: https://horstmann.com/codecheck/
python-questions.html [Accessed 2022-01-22]
12OpenEDG: Python Essentials - Part 1 (Basics). Available at: https://edube.org/study/
pe1 [Accessed 2023-03-20]
and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and
one completion (summary) test. The units include:
(1) Introduction to Python and computer programming,
(2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic
operators
(3) Boolean values, conditional loops, lists, logical and bitwise
operators
(4) Functions, tuples, dictionaries and data processing.
PE1 employs MCQ assessments. Formative assessments are called
quizzes and summative assessments are called tests. Qualitatively,
the test MCQs appear to be considerably more challenging than
quiz MCQs. The MCQs often include small snippets of code and
ask learners to reason about them.
There are 149 questions in PE1. An MCQ may involve a snippet
of Python code (with code) or it may be expressed fully in natural
language (no code ). For an MCQ, to be considered as with code
there either is at least one line fully dedicated to computer code,
and/or the choices are computer code expressions. Inline mentions
of names of functions or variables were not considered as sufficient
for an MCQ to be considered with code. Out of the 149 MCQs in
PE1, 96 have code snippets. The MCQs are further distinguished
into the following categories:
• True/False – The learner is asked to assess the truthfulness
of a single statement.
• Identify True/False Statement – The learner is asked to pick
one or more choices as either true or false.
• Finish Statement. – The learner is asked to complete a statement.
• Output – The learner is asked to identify the choice that
corresponds to the output of a given snippet of code.
• Fill-in Blanks – The learner is asked to fill in a code snippet
by selecting the appropriate choice as an answer.
• Other – Any MCQ that does not fall into any of the above
categories.
Table 1 provides additional details, including the categorization of
questions according to their type. Example questions for all the
types are shown in Appendix A.
Python Essentials - Part 2 (Intermediate) (PE2)13 covers advanced
aspects of Python programming, such as modules, packages, exceptions, file processing, or object-oriented programming. Similarly to
PE1, the course is organized into four units and it is also equipped
with a completion (summary) test. The course units are:
(1) Modules, packages, and PIP
(2) Strings, String and List Methods, Exceptions
(3) Object-Oriented Programming
(4) Miscellaneous
Just like PE1, PE2 also employs MCQ assessments exclusively (quizzes
and tests). There are 148 questions in PE2 out of which 83 have
code snippets. Table 1 has additional details.
Finally, Practical Programming with Python14 (PPP) centers around
hands-on projects focused on fundamental Python constructs and
13OpenEDG: Python Essentials - Part 2 (Intermediate). Available at: https://edube.org/
study/pe2 [Accessed 2023-01-15]
14Sail(): Social and Interactive Learning Platform. Available at: https://sailplatform.
org/courses. [Accessed 2023-03-20]

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic
Row 1: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: on function names and input variables [32, 49]. Although, models | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: operators
Row 2: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: like GPT are not trained to simulate code execution, they can in | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: (3) Boolean values, conditional loops, lists, logical and bitwise
Row 3: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: many cases generate code based on natural language description | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: operators
Row 4: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: of the code’s intent. Researchers have reported varying success at | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: (4) Functions, tuples, dictionaries and data processing.
Row 5: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: generating code in response to programming assignments, rang- | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic:
Row 6: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: ing from Codex’s 100% success generating Python computational | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: PE1 employs MCQ assessments. Formative assessments are called
Row 7: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: linear algebra programs [9], to 78.3% on some CS1 programming | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: quizzes and summative assessments are called tests. Qualitatively,
Row 8: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: problems [10], to 79% on the CodeCheck11 repository of Python | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: the test MCQs appear to be considerably more challenging than
Row 9: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: programming problems [7]. | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: quiz MCQs. The MCQs often include small snippets of code and
Row 10: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: Prompt Engineering. It has been well established that LLMs | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: ask learners to reason about them.
Row 11: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: are few-shot learners, capable of answering questions without addi- | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: There are 149 questions in PE1. An MCQ may involve a snippet
Row 12: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: tional fine-tuning in a zero-shot fashion [4]. In general, finding the | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: of Python code (with code) or it may be expressed fully in natural
Row 13: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: best prompt for a specific task is challenging, with prompts that | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: language (no code). For an MCQ, to be considered as with code
Row 14: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: are semantically similar sometimes providing large differences in | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: there either is at least one line fully dedicated to computer code,
Row 15: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: performance [51]. Despite this difficulty, there have been several | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: and/or the choices are computer code expressions. Inline mentions
Row 16: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: advancements in developing techniques for prompt engineering to | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: of names of functions or variables were not considered as sufficient
Row 17: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: improve the performance of LLMs. Numerous studies have explored | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: for an MCQ to be considered with code. Out of the 149 MCQs in
Row 18: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: prompts which include a number of examples to demonstrate what | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: PE1, 96 have code snippets. The MCQs are further distinguished
Row 19: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: the desired output should be [4, 12, 50]. However, the current re- | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: into the following categories:
Row 20: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: search literature remains inconclusive as to the efficacy of adding | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: • True/False – The learner is asked to assess the truthfulness
Row 21: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: examples to natural language prompts, with multiple studies sug- | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: of a single statement.
Row 22: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: gesting that the order and number of examples can dramatically | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: • Identify True/False Statement – The learner is asked to pick
Row 23: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: influence the performance of LLMs across various tasks [42, 50]. | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: one or more choices as either true or false.
Row 24: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: In introductory CS context, there has been an inquiry into ex- | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: • Finish Statement. – The learner is asked to complete a stateRow 25: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: plainable prompt-engineering practices. Denny et al. explored prompt- | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: ment.
Row 26: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: ing Copilot for CS1 exercises, demonstrating that while prompt | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: • Output – The learner is asked to identify the choice that
Row 27: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: engineering can significantly improve the performance of Copilot | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: corresponds to the output of a given snippet of code.
Row 28: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: on CS1 problems, verbose prompts can lead to decreases in model | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: • Fill-in Blanks – The learner is asked to fill in a code snippet
Row 29: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: performance [7]. Similar study has been performed on CS2 coding | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: by selecting the appropriate choice as an answer.
Row 30: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: tasks [11]. | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: • Other – Any MCQ that does not fall into any of the above
Row 31: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: More recently, there has been significant interest in chain of | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: categories.
Row 32: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: thought prompting, a technique where an LLM is asked to provide | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: Table 1 provides additional details, including the categorization of
Row 33: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: both the answer and the reasoning that lead to the answer in ques- | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: questions according to their type. Example questions for all the
Row 34: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: tion. This has lead to significant performance gains in symbolic and | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: types are shown in Appendix A.
Row 35: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: quantitative reasoning tasks, by forcing the LLM to emulate human | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: Python Essentials - Part 2 (Intermediate) (PE2)13 covers advanced
Row 36: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily: reasoning in addition to the answer itself [48]. Recently, researchers | (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic: aspects of Python programming, such as modules, packages, excep-
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=4 index=2]
Columns: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and
Row 1: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: tion of code is likely to capture code’s design intent more strongly | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: one completion (summary) test. The units include:
Row 2: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: than code’s formal properties. For example, work from multiple | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: (1) Introduction to Python and computer programming,
Row 3: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: studies suggest that models that interpret code depend heavily | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: (2) Data types, variables, basic input-output operations and basic
Row 4: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: on function names and input variables [32, 49]. Although, models | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: operators
Row 5: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: like GPT are not trained to simulate code execution, they can in | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: (3) Boolean values, conditional loops, lists, logical and bitwise
Row 6: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: many cases generate code based on natural language description | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: operators
Row 7: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: of the code’s intent. Researchers have reported varying success at | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: (4) Functions, tuples, dictionaries and data processing.
Row 8: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: generating code in response to programming assignments, rang- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and:
Row 9: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: ing from Codex’s 100% success generating Python computational | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: PE1 employs MCQ assessments. Formative assessments are called
Row 10: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: linear algebra programs [9], to 78.3% on some CS1 programming | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: quizzes and summative assessments are called tests. Qualitatively,
Row 11: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: problems [10], to 79% on the CodeCheck11 repository of Python | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: the test MCQs appear to be considerably more challenging than
Row 12: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: programming problems [7]. | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: quiz MCQs. The MCQs often include small snippets of code and
Row 13: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: Prompt Engineering.It has been well established that LLMs | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: ask learners to reason about them.
Row 14: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: are few-shot learners, capable of answering questions without addi- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: There are 149 questions in PE1. An MCQ may involve a snippet
Row 15: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: tional fine-tuning in a zero-shot fashion [4]. In general, finding the | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: of Python code (with code) or it may be expressed fully in natural
Row 16: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: best prompt for a specific task is challenging, with prompts that | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: language (no code). For an MCQ, to be considered as with code
Row 17: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: are semantically similar sometimes providing large differences in | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: there either is at least one line fully dedicated to computer code,
Row 18: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: performance [51]. Despite this difficulty, there have been several | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: and/or the choices are computer code expressions. Inline mentions
Row 19: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: advancements in developing techniques for prompt engineering to | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: of names of functions or variables were not considered as sufficient
Row 20: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: improve the performance of LLMs. Numerous studies have explored | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: for an MCQ to be considered with code. Out of the 149 MCQs in
Row 21: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: prompts which include a number of examples to demonstrate what | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: PE1, 96 have code snippets. The MCQs are further distinguished
Row 22: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: the desired output should be [4, 12, 50]. However, the current re- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: into the following categories:
Row 23: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: search literature remains inconclusive as to the efficacy of adding | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: • True/False – The learner is asked to assess the truthfulness
Row 24: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: examples to natural language prompts, with multiple studies sug- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: of a single statement.
Row 25: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: gesting that the order and number of examples can dramatically | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: • Identify True/False Statement – The learner is asked to pick
Row 26: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: influence the performance of LLMs across various tasks [42, 50]. | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: one or more choices as either true or false.
Row 27: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: In introductory CS context, there has been an inquiry into ex- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: • Finish Statement. – The learner is asked to complete a stateRow 28: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: plainable prompt-engineering practices. Denny et al. explored prompt- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: ment.
Row 29: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: ing Copilot for CS1 exercises, demonstrating that while prompt | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: • Output – The learner is asked to identify the choice that
Row 30: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: engineering can significantly improve the performance of Copilot | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: corresponds to the output of a given snippet of code.
Row 31: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: on CS1 problems, verbose prompts can lead to decreases in model | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: • Fill-in Blanks – The learner is asked to fill in a code snippet
Row 32: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: performance [7]. Similar study has been performed on CS2 coding | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: by selecting the appropriate choice as an answer.
Row 33: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: tasks [11]. | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: • Other – Any MCQ that does not fall into any of the above
Row 34: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: More recently, there has been significant interest in chain of | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: categories.
Row 35: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: thought prompting, a technique where an LLM is asked to provide | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: Table 1 provides additional details, including the categorization of
Row 36: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: both the answer and the reasoning that lead to the answer in ques- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: questions according to their type. Example questions for all the
Row 37: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: tion. This has lead to significant performance gains in symbolic and | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: types are shown in Appendix A.
Row 38: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: quantitative reasoning tasks, by forcing the LLM to emulate human | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: Python Essentials - Part 2 (Intermediate) (PE2)13 covers advanced
Row 39: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: reasoning in addition to the answer itself [48]. Recently, researchers | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: aspects of Python programming, such as modules, packages, excepRow 40: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: have also explored the so called “least-to-most” prompting, where | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: tions, file processing, or object-oriented programming. Similarly to
Row 41: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: a task is decomposed into several sub-problems, which are then | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: PE1, the course is organized into four units and it is also equipped
Row 42: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: answered all at once by the model [52]. | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: with a completion (summary) test. The course units are:
Row 43: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: (1) Modules, packages, and PIP
Row 44: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: 3 DATA | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: (2) Strings, String and List Methods, Exceptions
Row 45: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: For the purpose of this study, we obtained the data set that was | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: (3) Object-Oriented Programming
Row 46: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: originally used in [45, 46]. The researchers collected assessment | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: (4) Miscellaneous
Row 47: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: exercises from three real-world currently running Python program- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: Just like PE1, PE2 also employsMCQ assessments exclusively (quizze
Row 48: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: ming courses. Python Essentials - Part 1 (Basics)12 (PE1) transitions learners | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: and tests). There are 148 questions in PE2 out of which 83 havecode snippets. Table 1 has additional details.
Row 49: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: from a state of complete programming illiteracy to a level of pro- | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: Finally, Practical Programmingwith Python14 (PPP) centers aroun
Row 50: the context of human discussions about it, the model’s representa-: gramming knowledge which allows them to design, write, debug, | and run Python programs. There are four units in the course, and: hands-on projects focused on fundamental Python constructs and
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer Struggle to Pass Assessments ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA
Table 1: MCQ Data Set. Each row provides information about the MCQ assessments each of the courses employ. Each column
reports on the distribution of the MCQ types across the courses.
Course Units MCQ (no code) MCQ (with code) Course
(topics) T/F Id. T/F Fin. S. Other T/F Id. T/F Fin. S. Out Fill-in Other Overall
PE1 4 0 5 23 18 0 5 6 51 0 41 149
PE2 4 0 7 31 10 0 0 21 27 0 52 148
PPP 8 25 32 2 19 23 21 0 32 13 66 233
Type Overall 16 25 44 56 47 23 26 27 110 13 159 530
Table 2: Coding Activities Data Set. Each row provides information about each project’s focus area(s) and the number of
tasks and activities they contain. Fund. stands for Python
language fundamentals; SW Dev. stands for software development practices (e.g., Test-driven development); Data stands
for data processing and analysis (e.g., file formats, databases).
Project Topic Fund. SW Dev. Data Tasks Acts.
Types, variables, functions 4 6
Iteration, conditionals, 4 6
strings, basic I/O
Lists, sets, tuples and 2 11
dictionaries
Classes, objects, attributes 6 8
and methods
Debugging, refactoring, 6 15
testing and packaging
Files and datastores 3 7
Web scraping and office 4 7
document processing
Data analysis 3 9
32 69
exposure to software development tools, practices, and real-world
applications. The course consists of eight units which include:
(1) Python basics and introduction to functions
(2) Control flow, strings, input and output
(3) Python data structures,
(4) Object-oriented programming
(5) Software development
(6) Data manipulation
(7) Web scraping and office document processing
(8) Data analysis
PPP also uses MCQs extensively. However, their influence on learners’ passing the course is limited compared to PE1 and PE2. In
PPP MCQs are used as inline gating activities meant as formative
assessments and graded tests as summative assessments. The contribution of the tests to the overall grade would vary across the PPP
offerings but it would rarely exceed 20%. There are 233 MCQs in
PPP (144 with code snippets). Table 1 has additional details about
MCQs in PPP.
In comparison to PE1 and PE2, PPP mostly employs the projectbased education model [21]. Learners individually work on larger
programming projects that are subdivided into tasks. The projects
[15 lines ...]
popular_books [ book_id ] = {
' info ': { [5 lines ...]
' num_pages ': row [ ' num_pages '] , [2 lines ...]
} ,
' rating ': {
' average_rating ': row [ ' average_rating '] ,
' t ex t _ re v i ew s _ co u n t': row [ ' t e xt _ re v i ew s _ co u n t']
[5 lines ...]
[FEEDBACK] The value of [...] book 's `info` and `num_pages`
keys [...] should be of type `<class 'int'>`. [...] 2
[22 lines ...]
' num_pages ': int ( row [ ' num_pages ']) , [6 lines ...]
' average_rating ': row [ ' average_rating '] ,
' t e xt _ r ev i ew s _ co u n t': int ( row [ ' t ex t _ re v i ew s _ co u n t' ])
[5 lines ...]
[FEEDBACK] The value of [...] book 's `rating` and `average_rating`
keys [...] should be of type `<class 'float'>`. [...] 6
[29 lines ...]
' average_rating ': float ( row [ ' average_rating ' ]) ,
[7 lines ...]
Figure 1: An example interaction with auto-grader which
recognizes that the num_pages field (1) should not be of type
str and produces corresponding feedback (2). After the flaw
is corrected (3), as well as similar one (4) not mentioned in
the feedback, another issue with the average_rating field (5)
is fixed (7) based on the additional feedback (6).
require sustained effort that often extends over several days, depending on the proficiency of the learner. All the eight projects
are auto-graded. The auto-grader provides learners with feedback
that can be utilized for improving the solutions until a project deadline. The score from the projects, tests, and reflections (discussion
posts) determines if a learner successfully completes the course.
The projects typically contribute around 80% towards the grade.
There are 69 coding activities in PPP (elements of the 32 project
tasks). Further details about the projects and their coding activities
are reported in Table 2.
Each project activity is associated with one or more assessments
which are high-level rules that need to be met in order for a learner
to be awarded with score points. For example, an assessment could
require the output JSON file to have specific fields in terms of their
names and data types. The auto-grader then uses an extensive battery of detailed tests to ensure the high-level assessment rule is met.
The test cases are dynamically generated during the evaluation of

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: Course | Units | Unnamed: 0 | MCQ (no code) | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | MCQ (with code) | Unnamed: 4 | Course.1
Row 1: Course: | Units: (topics) | Unnamed: 0: T/F | MCQ (no code): Id. T/F Fin. S. | Unnamed: 1: Other | Unnamed: 2: T/F | Unnamed: 3: Id. T/F | MCQ (with code): Fin. S. Out Fill-in | Unnamed: 4: Other | Course.1: Overall
Row 2: Course: PE1 | Units: 4 | Unnamed: 0: 0 | MCQ (no code): 5 23 | Unnamed: 1: 18 | Unnamed: 2: 0 | Unnamed: 3: 5 | MCQ (with code): 6 51 0 | Unnamed: 4: 41 | Course.1: 149
Row 3: Course: PE2 | Units: 4 | Unnamed: 0: 0 | MCQ (no code): 7 31 | Unnamed: 1: 10 | Unnamed: 2: 0 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | MCQ (with code): 21 27 0 | Unnamed: 4: 52 | Course.1: 148
Row 4: Course: PPP | Units: 8 | Unnamed: 0: 25 | MCQ (no code): 32 2 | Unnamed: 1: 19 | Unnamed: 2: 23 | Unnamed: 3: 21 | MCQ (with code): 0 32 13 | Unnamed: 4: 66 | Course.1: 233
Row 5: Course: Type Overall | Units: 16 | Unnamed: 0: 25 | MCQ (no code): 44 56 | Unnamed: 1: 47 | Unnamed: 2: 23 | Unnamed: 3: 26 | MCQ (with code): 27 110 13 | Unnamed: 4: 159 | Course.1: 530
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA Savelka et al.
each submission. In case one or more tests fail, the learner receives
a feedback the aim of which is to (1) clearly explain as to why the
assessment rule is not met, and, hence, the score cannot be awarded,
and (2) provide a hint on how to iterate on the solution towards
a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide
an extensive enumeration of the failed test cases. Instead, it often
focuses on the most prominent one or the first one encountered.
The feedback usually does not expose the exact nature of the test.
While the feedback varies greatly across the activities the most
common pattern is the contrast between the expectation and the
actual state of the submitted solution. In most of the cases, the focus
of the auto-grader is on the correctness of the solution. However,
there are several activities focusing on code style and quality. In
those activities, the grader goes beyond correctness and evaluates
the compliance of the submitted solution. Figure 1 shows an example interaction with the auto-grader, illustrating how the feedback
facilitates iterative improvement of the solution.
4 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
4.1 Models
The original GPT model [40] is a 12-layer decoder-only transformer
[47] with masked self-attention heads. Its core capability is finetuning on a downstream task. The GPT-2 model [41] largely follows
the details of the original GPT model with a few modifications, such
as layer normalization moved to the input of each sub-block, additional layer-normalization after the first self-attention block, and
a modified initialization. Compared to the original model it displays remarkable multi-task learning capabilities [41]. The third
generation of GPT models [4] uses almost the same architecture as
GPT-2. The only difference is that it alternates dense and locally
banded sparse attention patterns in the layers of the transformer.
The main focus of Brown et al. was to study the dependence of performance and model size where eight differently sized models were
trained (from 125 million to 175 billion parameters). The largest
of the models is commonly referred to as GPT-3. The interesting
property of these models is that they appear to be very strong zeroand few-shot learners. This ability appears to improve with the
increasing size of the model [ 4]. The technical details about the
recently released GPT-4 model have not been disclosed due to (alleged) concerns about potential misuses of the technology as well
as highly competitive market with generative AI [35].
We are primarily interested in the performance of the gpt-4
(GPT-4) model as compared to text-davinci-003 (GPT-3.5). As
of writing of this paper, GPT-4 is by far the most advanced model
released by OpenAI. The model is focused on dialog between a
user and a system. On the other hand, GPT-3.5 is a more general
model focused on text completion. It builds on top of previous
text-davinci-002, which in turn is based on code-davinci-002
(focused on code-completion tasks) which is sometimes referred to
as codex. To gauge the rate of improvement over the several recent
years, we compare the performance of GPT-4 to GPT-3.5 as well
as to the previous generation’s InstructGPT text-davinci-001
model (GPT-3)15 on the MCQ answering task. For coding exercises,
we benchmark GPT-4 to GPT-3.5 only. This is because GPT-3 is
15OpenAI: Model index for researchers. Available at: https://beta.openai.com/docs/
model-index-for-researchers/instructgpt-models [Accessed 2023-01-15]
mostly focused on text completion, and is not capable of producing
(decent) solutions to coding exercises; this ability only emerged
with code-davinci-002 and later models.
We set the temperature of all the models to 0.0, which corresponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more
creative the output but it can also be less factual. As the temperature
approaches 0.0, the model becomes more deterministic, which we
deem as important for reproducability. Given that existing literature does use different temperatures for testing, we did initially
test a variety of temperatures, but found that setting temperature
to 0.0 worked well for our setting, which falls inline with the findings and precedence of existing work regarding multiple-choice
questions [2, 27, 28]. Additionally, given that we were largely evaluating questions automatically a single-time per question, setting
temperature to 0.0 provided us with the most likely completion of
GPT-4, allowing us to be more confident in our resulting analysis.
We set max_tokens to 500 (a token roughly corresponds to a word)
for MCQ answering, and to 2,000 (GPT-3.5) or 4,000 (GPT-4) for
coding activities. This parameter controls the maximum length
of the completion (i.e., the output). Note that each model has a
length limit on the prompt, and the completion counts towards
that limit. While GPT-4 allows for 8,192 tokens16 the GPT-3.5 can
only accept up to 4,097 tokens. We set top_p to 1, as is recommended when temperature is set to 0.0. This parameter is related to
temperature and also influences creativeness of the output. We set
frequency_penalty to 0, which allows repetition by ensuring no
penalty is applied to repetitions. Finally, we setpresence_penalty
to 0, ensuring no penalty is applied to tokens appearing multiple
times in the output.
4.2 Experimental Design
To test the performance on MCQs, we submit questions one by
one using the openai Python library 17 which is a wrapper for
the OpenAI’s REST API. For GPT-3 and GPT-3.5, we embed each
question in the prompt templates shown in Figure 2. Since GPT4 is a model optimized for dialogue, we use different prompts—
the ones shown in Figure 3. Note that the prompt for GPT-4 is
designed with the intent to prevent the model from explaining
the answer to a user as we are only interested in the answer(s)
themselves. Each model returns one or more of the choices as
the prompt completion (response), which is then compared to the
reference answer. Following the approach adopted by PE1 and PE2,
partially correct answers are considered to be incorrect.
In coding tasks, we submit the instructions using the prompt
templates shown in Figure 4 for GPT-3.5. Again, we use a different
prompt for GPT-4 which is shown in Figure 5. While we needed to
embed the coding activity instructions into the GPT-3.5’s prompt
(as shown in Figure 4) these are passed to GPT-4 more naturally as
a message coming from a user.
To each submission, the auto-grader assigns a score and generates detailed actionable feedback. If the full score was not achieved
we amended the GPT-3.5’s prompt with the addendum (shown in
Figure 4). For GPT-4 we simply continued in the dialogue where the
16There is also a variant of the model that supports up to 32,768 tokens.
17GitHub: OpenAI Python Library. Available at: https://github.com/openai/openaipython [Accessed 2023-01-16]

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more
Row 1: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: an extensive enumeration of the failed test cases. Instead, it often | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: creative the output but it can also be less factual. As the temperature
Row 2: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: focuses on the most prominent one or the first one encountered. | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: approaches 0.0, the model becomes more deterministic, which we
Row 3: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: The feedback usually does not expose the exact nature of the test. | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: deem as important for reproducability. Given that existing literaRow 4: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: While the feedback varies greatly across the activities the most | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: ture does use different temperatures for testing, we did initially
Row 5: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: common pattern is the contrast between the expectation and the | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: test a variety of temperatures, but found that setting temperature
Row 6: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: actual state of the submitted solution. In most of the cases, the focus | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: to 0.0 worked well for our setting, which falls inline with the findRow 7: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: of the auto-grader is on the correctness of the solution. However, | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: ings and precedence of existing work regarding multiple-choice
Row 8: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: there are several activities focusing on code style and quality. In | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: questions [2, 27, 28]. Additionally, given that we were largely evalRow 9: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: those activities, the grader goes beyond correctness and evaluates | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: uating questions automatically a single-time per question, setting
Row 10: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: the compliance of the submitted solution. Figure 1 shows an exam- | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: temperature to 0.0 provided us with the most likely completion of
Row 11: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: ple interaction with the auto-grader, illustrating how the feedback | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: GPT-4, allowing us to be more confident in our resulting analysis.
Row 12: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: facilitates iterative improvement of the solution. | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: We set max_tokens to 500 (a token roughly corresponds to a word)
Row 13: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: for MCQ answering, and to 2,000 (GPT-3.5) or 4,000 (GPT-4) for
Row 14: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: 4 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: coding activities. This parameter controls the maximum length
Row 15: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: 4.1 Models | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: of the completion (i.e., the output). Note that each model has a
Row 16: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: length limit on the prompt, and the completion counts towards
Row 17: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: The original GPT model [40] is a 12-layer decoder-only transformer | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: that limit. While GPT-4 allows for 8,192 tokens16 the GPT-3.5 can
Row 18: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: [47] with masked self-attention heads. Its core capability is fine- | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: only accept up to 4,097 tokens. We set top_p to 1, as is recomRow 19: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: tuning on a downstream task. The GPT-2 model [41] largely follows | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: mendedwhen temperature is set to 0.0. This parameter is related to
Row 20: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: the details of the original GPT model with a fewmodifications, such | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: temperature and also influences creativeness of the output. We set
Row 21: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: as layer normalization moved to the input of each sub-block, addi- | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: frequency_penalty to 0, which allows repetition by ensuring no
Row 22: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: tional layer-normalization after the first self-attention block, and | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: penalty is applied to repetitions. Finally, we set presence_penalty
Row 23: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: a modified initialization. Compared to the original model it dis- | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: to 0, ensuring no penalty is applied to tokens appearing multiple
Row 24: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: plays remarkable multi-task learning capabilities [41]. The third | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: times in the output.
Row 25: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: generation of GPT models [4] uses almost the same architecture as | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more:
Row 26: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: GPT-2. The only difference is that it alternates dense and locally | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: 4.2 Experimental Design
Row 27: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: banded sparse attention patterns in the layers of the transformer. | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more:
Row 28: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: The main focus of Brown et al. was to study the dependence of per- | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: To test the performance on MCQs, we submit questions one by
Row 29: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: formance and model size where eight differently sized models were | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: one using the openai Python library17 which is a wrapper for
Row 30: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: trained (from 125 million to 175 billion parameters). The largest | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: the OpenAI’s REST API. For GPT-3 and GPT-3.5, we embed each
Row 31: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: of the models is commonly referred to as GPT-3. The interesting | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: question in the prompt templates shown in Figure 2. Since GPTRow 32: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: property of these models is that they appear to be very strong zero- | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: 4 is a model optimized for dialogue, we use different prompts—
Row 33: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: and few-shot learners. This ability appears to improve with the | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: the ones shown in Figure 3. Note that the prompt for GPT-4 is
Row 34: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: increasing size of the model [4]. The technical details about the | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: designed with the intent to prevent the model from explaining
Row 35: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: recently released GPT-4 model have not been disclosed due to (al- | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: the answer to a user as we are only interested in the answer(s)
Row 36: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: leged) concerns about potential misuses of the technology as well | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: themselves. Each model returns one or more of the choices as
Row 37: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: as highly competitive market with generative AI [35]. | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: the prompt completion (response), which is then compared to the
Row 38: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: We are primarily interested in the performance of the gpt-4 | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: reference answer. Following the approach adopted by PE1 and PE2,
Row 39: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: (GPT-4) model as compared to text-davinci-003 (GPT-3.5). As | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: partially correct answers are considered to be incorrect.
Row 40: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: of writing of this paper, GPT-4 is by far the most advanced model | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: In coding tasks, we submit the instructions using the prompt
Row 41: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: released by OpenAI. The model is focused on dialog between a | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: templates shown in Figure 4 for GPT-3.5. Again, we use a different
Row 42: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: user and a system. On the other hand, GPT-3.5 is a more general | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: prompt for GPT-4 which is shown in Figure 5. While we needed to
Row 43: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: model focused on text completion. It builds on top of previous | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: embed the coding activity instructions into the GPT-3.5’s prompt
Row 44: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: text-davinci-002, which in turn is based on code-davinci-002 | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: (as shown in Figure 4) these are passed to GPT-4 more naturally as
Row 45: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: (focused on code-completion tasks) which is sometimes referred to | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: a message coming from a user.
Row 46: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: as codex. To gauge the rate of improvement over the several recent | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: To each submission, the auto-grader assigns a score and generRow 47: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: years, we compare the performance of GPT-4 to GPT-3.5 as well | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: ates detailed actionable feedback. If the full score was not achieved
Row 48: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: as to the previous generation’s InstructGPT text-davinci-001 | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: we amended the GPT-3.5’s prompt with the addendum (shown in
Row 49: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: model (GPT-3)15 on the MCQ answering task. For coding exercises, | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: Figure 4). For GPT-4 we simply continued in the dialogue where the
Row 50: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: we benchmark GPT-4 to GPT-3.5 only. This is because GPT-3 is | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more:
Row 51: a successful outcome. The feedback would typically not provide: | sponds to no randomness. The higher the temperature the more: 16There is also a variant of the model that supports up to 32,768 tokens.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer Struggle to Pass Assessments ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA
I am a highly intelligent bot that can easily handle answering
multiple-choice questions on introductory Python topics.
Given a question and choices I can always pick the right ones.
Question: {{question}}
Choices:
{{choices}}
The correct answer:
Figure 2: MCQ Prompt Template for GPT-3 and GPT-3.5. The
text of the preamble (1) is inspired by OpenAI’s QA example.
The {{question}} token (2) is replaced with the question text.
The {{choices}} token (3) is replaced with the candidate answers where each one is placed on a single line preceded by
a capital letter.
You are a highly intelligent bot that can easily handle answering
multiple-choice questions on introductory Python topics. Given a
question and choices you can always pick the right ones. You are
not expected to explain the answers.
Example user question:
What function in Python is typically used to display text to the
terminal?
A. input
B. print
C. len
D. int
Example bot response:
B. print
Question: {{question}}
Choices:
{{choices}}
2 3
Figure 3: MCQ Prompt Templates for GPT-4. The outer frame
shows the system’s prompt which is used to set the context
of the dialogue. The text of the preamble (1) is inspired by
OpenAI’s QA example. The example user question and bot
response (2) primes the model to return the answer(s) only
(no explanations). The inner frame depicts the user’s message
sent to the dialogue system. The {{question}} token (3) is
replaced with the question text. The {{choices}} token (4) is
replaced with the candidate answers where each one is placed
on a single line preceded by a capital letter.
solution it generated was followed by the auto-grader’s feedback.
Then, we submitted the revised solution to the auto-grader and
repeated the process until either the full score was achieved or the
solution remained unchanged from the preceding one (impasse).
When dealing with coding activities, we encountered the models’
limitation on the prompt length (4,097 tokens for GPT-3.5 and 8,192
or 32,768 for GPT-4). Within this limit, it was necessary to fit: (i)
the prompt boilerplate; (ii) the instructions; (iii) the contents of the
handout files (usually starter code) distributed to learners; and (iv)
the solution generated by the model (i.e., the prompt completion).
Instead of full project (8) instructions we submitted the individual
project tasks (32). If a task could not be fitted into a prompt, we
decreased the max_tokens parameter (space for solution) to <2,000
for GPT-3.5 or <4,000 for GPT-4. If this did not resolve the issue we
edited the instructions leaving out pieces that could be reasonably
expected as not being useful for the GPT models. As the last resort,
TASK
Implement a Python program to print "Hello, World!" in hello.py.
=== hello.py ===
# TODO 1
===
SOLUTION
=== hello.py ===
print("Hello, World!")
===
TASK
{{instructions}}
=== {{file_name}} ===
{{handout}}
===
SOLUTION
[...]
SOLUTION
=== {{file_name}} ===
{{solution}}
===
FEEDBACK
{{feedback}}
FIXED SOLUTION
Figure 4: Coding Task Prompt Templates for GPT-3.5. Outer
frame is the first submission template. The preamble (1)
primes the model to generate a solution code as completion.
The {{instructions}} token (2) is replaced with the coding
task instructions. A starter code is injected into {{file_name}}
(3) and {{handout}} (4) tokens. The inner frame shows the
template for re-submission (appended to the original). The
{{file_name}} (5) and {{solution}} (6) were replaced with the
GPT’s solution and the {{feedback}} (7) with the auto-grader’s
feedback.
You are a highly intelligent coding bot that can easily handle any
Python programming task. Given a natural language instructions you
can always implement the correct Python solution. Your focus is the
solution code only. You are not allowed to provide explanations.
Example (toy) instructions:
Implement a Python program to print "Hello, World!" in the
hello.py.
Example bot solution:
=== hello.py ===
print("Hello, World!")
===
Figure 5: Coding Task Prompt Template for GPT-4. The preamble (1) primes the model to generate the code of the solution only (no explanations). The example instructions (2)
and solution (3) are used to further clarify the expectations
on the output.
we would split the task into several smaller coding activities (69
overall) if the task was to develop several loosely coupled elements.
The GPT models’ solutions were then submitted to the auto-grader.
5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.1 (RQ1) To what degree can GPT-4 generate
correct answers to MCQs?
The results of applying the GPT models to the MCQ exercises
are reported in Tables 3 (PE1), 4 (PE2), and 5 (PE3). While the
original GPT-3 model correctly answered only 199 out of the 530
questions (37.5%), the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models were much more
successful. GPT-3.5 correctly answered 341 MCQs (64.3%). GPT-4

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: project tasks (32). If a task could not be fitted into a prompt, we | The results of applying the GPT models to the MCQ exercises
Row 1: project tasks (32). If a task could not be fitted into a prompt, we: decreased the max_tokens parameter (space for solution) to <2,000 | The results of applying the GPT models to the MCQ exercises: are reported in Tables 3 (PE1), 4 (PE2), and 5 (PE3). While the
Row 2: project tasks (32). If a task could not be fitted into a prompt, we: for GPT-3.5 or <4,000 for GPT-4. If this did not resolve the issue we | The results of applying the GPT models to the MCQ exercises: original GPT-3 model correctly answered only 199 out of the 530
Row 3: project tasks (32). If a task could not be fitted into a prompt, we: edited the instructions leaving out pieces that could be reasonably | The results of applying the GPT models to the MCQ exercises: questions (37.5%), the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models were much more
Row 4: project tasks (32). If a task could not be fitted into a prompt, we: expected as not being useful for the GPT models. As the last resort, | The results of applying the GPT models to the MCQ exercises: successful. GPT-3.5 correctly answered 341 MCQs (64.3%). GPT-4
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA Savelka et al.
successfully handled 446 questions (84.1%). Hence, we observe a
sizeable improvements across the successive generations of the
GPT models.
The results from PE1 are reported in Table 3. In order to pass
the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.
While the GPT-3 model could not pass any of the tests, and the
more successful GPT-3.5 model passed only the first course module,
as already reported in prior work [45, 46], the GPT-4 model passed
all the four module tests as well as the summary test (i.e., passing
the course with the overall score of 85%).
The performance of the models on PE2 is presented in Table 4.
The assessment scheme of PE2 is the same as that of PE1. Here,
the GPT-3.5 model was somewhat more successful and passed 3/4
module tests. However, it also failed the Summary Test (65.0%).
The original GPT-3 model still could not pass a single test. These
findings were also reported in prior work [45, 46] The GPT-4 model
again passed all the five graded assignments (89.6% overall score).
Table 5 reports the results of applying the models to the MCQs
in PPP. Again, we observe similar progression from the weakest
GPT-3 model (30.9% on the tests), through the better performing
GPT-3.5 (65.4%), as already reported in prior work [45, 46], to the
best performing GPT-4 model (77.8%). Note, that passing of PPP is
not solely determined by the MCQ assessments, and largely depends
on the performance on the coding activities (projects).
Overall, the findings reported in prior work [45, 46] no longer
hold. While GPT-3 and GPT-3.5 models’ performance on the programming MCQs is not sufficient for passing the three courses,
GPT-4 handles the MCQs well enough to reliably pass the course
MCQ assessments. Note, that in some countries much lower passing
scores may be required. Hence, our finding of GPT-4 passing the
assessments the prior models fail to pass might not hold in those
contexts.
5.2 (RQ2) Does GPT-4 struggle with
programming MCQs containing code?
Table 6 reports the results of our experiments on how GPT models
handle MCQs of various types. The GPT-4 model performs the best
(84.5% overall) with quite a noticeable margin over the GPT-3.5
(65.5% overall). The performance of the original GPT-3 appears to
be much lower compared to the other two models. This is to be
expected, as the major breakthrough in OpenAI GPT models’ capabilities in handling computer code was Codex (code-davinci-002)
[6] which is the predecessor oftext-davinci-003 (i.e., GPT-3.5).18
There appears to be a clear difference between the performance
of the most capable GPT-4 on the MCQs that contain code snippets
(81.0% overall) compared to those that do not (90.7% overall). This
is to be expected as the combination of code and natural language
likely constitutes (on average) more complex input than natural
language alone. Additionally, it is quite possible that in our particular context the questions with code are (on average) more difficult
than questions with no code. However, notice that the gap appears
to be much wider in the preceding generations of the GPT models
(29.9% vs 53.3% for GPT-3 and 59.5% vs 77.9% for GPT-3.5). Hence, it
appears that GPT-4’s capabilities in handling MCQs with code are
18OpenAI: Model index for researchers. Available at: https://beta.openai.com/docs/
model-index-for-researchers/instructgpt-models [Accessed 2023-01-15]
much improved compared to its predecessors. However, the observable difference between the performance on MCQs with natural
language only and MCQs with code remains. There also appears
to be clear difference between the performance of GPT-4 on the
completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in
and the rest (81.3%). Since GPT models are primarily focused on
prompt completion, be it text or computer code, this finding is also
as expected. Hence, the findings from prior work [45] still hold in
this regard.
To investigate further GPT-4’s code handling limitations, we
analyzed the 67 MCQs with code that GPT-4 answered incorrectly,
manually inspecting the full answers, and sometimes altering the
prompt and requerying, to hypothesize the reasons for the errors.
We found that the model’s mistakes fell into five main categories,
listed in Table 7.
Problems in the question (WRONG-Q) GPT’s explanations
in some cases exposed problems in the original questions. For example, one question asks, in part, “Which of the potential solutions would load the data into a DataFrame object where the index is set to the month column?”. The correct answer was “df =
pd.read_csv("tickets_monthly.csv", index_col=0) ”, using
the Pandas package to load a CSV file into a variable df. However GPT-4, answered “pd.read_csv( "tickets_monthly.csv",
index_col=0)”, explaining that the actual correct answer “... is
correct in terms of functionality, but it assigns the DataFrame to a
variable df. The question asked for a solution that loads the data
into a DataFrame object, not a variable assignment. ” Note that the
answer preferred byt the GPT-4 model would be defensible since it
does in fact load a DataFrame, albeit in an impractical way. Realistically, we might have granted a student the point if they provided
similar explanation . Also note that GPT-4’s explanation is not completely correct. The correct answer does load a DataFrame as well
as assign it. It is then the better answer of the two (because more
pragmatic).
Multi-hop reasoning (MULTI-HOP) GPT is known to have
difficulty with answering questions that require multiple hops of
reasoning [48]. Adding an instruction to show the reasoning steps
sometimes improves the answers, or even leads to revising a wrong
answer after explaining it. We re-queried GPT4 for some questions
that appeared to use multi-hop reasoning, changing the prompt to
encourage explanation (we removed the prompt text discouraging
explanations, and added, “Give your answer, then provide your
reasoning:” at the end of the prompt.) This indeed corrected some,
but not all, of the errors. Interestingly, even when GPT-4 lists out
the steps, its analysis of a step may be incorrect in the context
of a complex, multi-hop answer, even though it is correct when
answering a similar question in isolation. Sometimes this mimics
motivated reasoning. For example, one question involved predicting
the effect of two apparently opposite string replacement commands:
quote = '"The things that make me different are the ' +\
'things that make me, me." '
new_sentence = quote.replace(" different", ", me")
new_sentence = new_sentence.replace(", me",
" different")
Although the second replacement does not restore the original
sentence, GPT’s step claims that it does:

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests. | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in
Row 1: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: While the GPT-3 model could not pass any of the tests, and the | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: and the rest (81.3%). Since GPT models are primarily focused on
Row 2: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: more successful GPT-3.5 model passed only the first course module, | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: prompt completion, be it text or computer code, this finding is also
Row 3: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: as already reported in prior work [45, 46], the GPT-4 model passed | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: as expected. Hence, the findings from prior work [45] still hold in
Row 4: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: all the four module tests as well as the summary test (i.e., passing | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: this regard.
Row 5: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: the course with the overall score of 85%). | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: To investigate further GPT-4’s code handling limitations, we
Row 6: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: The performance of the models on PE2 is presented in Table 4. | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: analyzed the 67 MCQs with code that GPT-4 answered incorrectly,
Row 7: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: The assessment scheme of PE2 is the same as that of PE1. Here, | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: manually inspecting the full answers, and sometimes altering the
Row 8: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: the GPT-3.5 model was somewhat more successful and passed 3/4 | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: prompt and requerying, to hypothesize the reasons for the errors.
Row 9: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: module tests. However, it also failed the Summary Test (65.0%). | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: We found that the model’s mistakes fell into five main categories,
Row 10: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: The original GPT-3 model still could not pass a single test. These | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: listed in Table 7.
Row 11: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: findings were also reported in prior work [45, 46] The GPT-4 model | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: Problems in the question (WRONG-Q) GPT’s explanations
Row 12: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: again passed all the five graded assignments (89.6% overall score). | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: in some cases exposed problems in the original questions. For exRow 13: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: Table 5 reports the results of applying the models to the MCQs | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: ample, one question asks, in part, “Which of the potential soluRow 14: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: in PPP. Again, we observe similar progression from the weakest | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: tions would load the data into a DataFrame object where the inRow 15: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: GPT-3 model (30.9% on the tests), through the better performing | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: dex is set to the month column?”. The correct answer was “df =
Row 16: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: GPT-3.5 (65.4%), as already reported in prior work [45, 46], to the | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: pd.read_csv("tickets_monthly.csv", index_col=0)”, using
Row 17: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: best performing GPT-4 model (77.8%). Note, that passing of PPP is | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: the Pandas package to load a CSV file into a variable df. HowRow 18: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: not solely determined by theMCQ assessments, and largely depends | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: ever GPT-4, answered “pd.read_csv( "tickets_monthly.csv",
Row 19: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: on the performance on the coding activities (projects). | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: index_col=0)”, explaining that the actual correct answer “... is
Row 20: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: Overall, the findings reported in prior work [45, 46] no longer | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: correct in terms of functionality, but it assigns the DataFrame to a
Row 21: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: hold. While GPT-3 and GPT-3.5 models’ performance on the pro- | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: variable df. The question asked for a solution that loads the data
Row 22: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: gramming MCQs is not sufficient for passing the three courses, | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: into a DataFrame object, not a variable assignment.” Note that the
Row 23: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: GPT-4 handles the MCQs well enough to reliably pass the course | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: answer preferred byt the GPT-4 model would be defensible since it
Row 24: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: MCQ assessments. Note, that in some countries much lower passing | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: does in fact load a DataFrame, albeit in an impractical way. RealisRow 25: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: scores may be required. Hence, our finding of GPT-4 passing the | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: tically, we might have granted a student the point if they provided
Row 26: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: assessments the prior models fail to pass might not hold in those | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: similar explanation . Also note that GPT-4’s explanation is not comRow 27: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: contexts. | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: pletely correct. The correct answer does load a DataFrame as well
Row 28: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: as assign it. It is then the better answer of the two (because more
Row 29: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: 5.2 (RQ2) Does GPT-4 struggle with | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: pragmatic).
Row 30: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: programming MCQs containing code? | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: Multi-hop reasoning (MULTI-HOP) GPT is known to have
Row 31: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: Table 6 reports the results of our experiments on how GPT models | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: difficulty with answering questions that require multiple hops of
Row 32: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: handle MCQs of various types. The GPT-4 model performs the best | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: reasoning [48]. Adding an instruction to show the reasoning steps
Row 33: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: (84.5% overall) with quite a noticeable margin over the GPT-3.5 | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: sometimes improves the answers, or even leads to revising a wrong
Row 34: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: (65.5% overall). The performance of the original GPT-3 appears to | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: answer after explaining it. We re-queried GPT4 for some questions
Row 35: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: be much lower compared to the other two models. This is to be | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: that appeared to use multi-hop reasoning, changing the prompt to
Row 36: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: expected, as the major breakthrough in OpenAI GPT models’ capa- | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: encourage explanation (we removed the prompt text discouraging
Row 37: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: bilities in handling computer code was Codex ( code-davinci-002) | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: explanations, and added, “Give your answer, then provide your
Row 38: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: [6] which is the predecessor of text-davinci-003(i.e., GPT-3.5).18 | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: reasoning:” at the end of the prompt.) This indeed corrected some,
Row 39: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: There appears to be a clear difference between the performance | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: but not all, of the errors. Interestingly, even when GPT-4 lists out
Row 40: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: of the most capable GPT-4 on the MCQs that contain code snippets | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: the steps, its analysis of a step may be incorrect in the context
Row 41: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: (81.0% overall) compared to those that do not (90.7% overall). This | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: of a complex, multi-hop answer, even though it is correct when
Row 42: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: is to be expected as the combination of code and natural language | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: answering a similar question in isolation. Sometimes this mimics
Row 43: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: likely constitutes (on average) more complex input than natural | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: motivated reasoning. For example, one question involved predicting
Row 44: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: language alone. Additionally, it is quite possible that in our particu- | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: the effect of two apparently opposite string replacement commands:
Row 45: the course the score of 70% or better is required from all the 5 tests.: lar context the questions with code are (on average) more difficult | completion-oriented MCQs (96.9%), i.e., Finish Statement and Fill-in: quote = '"The things that make me different are the ' +\
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer Struggle to Pass Assessments ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA
Table 3: PE1 results. The graded assignments are colored; green and check mark indicate passing while red means failing.
Quizzes Tests
Module Topic GPT-3 GPT-3.5 GPT-4 GPT-3 GPT-3.5 GPT-4
Introduction to Python and programming 8/10 (80.0%) 10/10 (100%) 10/10 (100%) 6/10 (60.0%) 9/10 (90.0%) 10/10 (100%)
Data types, variables, I/O, operators 6/10 (60.0%) 10/10 (100%) 10/10 (100%) 6/20 (30.0%) 10/20 (50.0%) 18/20 (90.0%)
Booleans, conditionals, loops, operators 3/10 (30.0%) 7/10 (70.0%) 10/10 (100%) 6/20 (30.0%) 12/20 (60.0%) 16/20 (80.0%)
Functions, data structures, exceptions 6/12 (50.0%) 9/12 (75.0%) 9/12 (75.0%) 7/22 (31.8%) 12/22 (54.5%) 20/22 (90.9%)
Completion (Summary Test) - - - 7/35 (20.0%) 17/35 (48.6%) 27/35 (77.1%)
Course Total 23/42 36/42 39/42 32/107 60/107 91/107
(54.8%) (85.7%) (92.4%) (29.9%) (56.1%) (85.0%)
Table 4: PE2 results. The graded assignments are colored; green and check mark indicates passing while red means failing.
Quizzes Tests
Module Topic GPT-3 GPT-3.5 GPT-4 GPT-3 GPT-3.5 GPT-4
Modules, packages, and PIP 3/10 (30.0%) 6/10 (60.0%) 10/10 (100%) 10/18 (55.6%) 14/18 (77.8%) 17/18 (94.4%)
Strings, string list methods, exceptions 7/10 (70.0%) 6/10 (60.0%) 9/10 (90.0%) 4/15 (26.7%) 11/15 (73.3%) 13/15 (86.7%)
Object-oriented programming 7/10 (70.0%) 8/10 (80.0%) 9/10 (90.0%) 4/17 (23.5%) 12/17 (70.6%) 15/17 (82.4%)
Miscellaneous 8/12 (66.7%) 9/12 (75.0%) 11/12 (91.7%) 4/16 (25.0%) 9/16 (56.2%) 15/16 (93.8%)
Completion (Summary Test) - - - 11/40 (27.5%) 26/40 (65.0%) 35/40 (87.5%)
Course Total 25/42 29/42 40/42 33/106 72/106 95/106
(59.5%) (69.0%) (95.2%) (31.1%) (67.9%) (89.6%)
Table 5: PPP results. The tests contribute to the grade, typically by no more than 20%. Since in PPP tests themselves do not
determine pass or fail no colors are used.
Quizzes Tests
Module Topic GPT-3 GPT-3.5 GPT-4 GPT-3 GPT-3.5 GPT-4
Python basics and introduction to functions 12/30 (40.0%) 21/30 (70.0%) 27/30 (90.0%) 4/12 (33.3%) 9/12 (75.0%) 10/12 (83.3%)
Control flow, strings, input and output 8/22 (36.4%) 10/22 (45.5%) 16/22 (72.7%) 3/11 (27.3%) 8/11 (72.7%) 10/11 (90.9%)
Python data structures 9/18 (50.0%) 10/18 (55.6%) 14/18 (77.8%) 4/14 (28.6%) 9/14 (64.3%) 10/14 (71.4%)
Object-oriented programming 6/14 (42.9%) 7/14 (50.0%) 11/14 (77.6%) 4/11 (36.4%) 10/11 (90.9%) 11/11 (100%)
Software development 9/19 (47.4%) 12/19 (63.2%) 16/19 (84.2%) 5/10 (50.0%) 7/10 (70.0%) 10/10 (100%)
Data manipulation 6/17 (35.3%) 9/17 (52.9%) 13/17 (76.5%) 5/13 (38.5%) 5/13 (35.5%) 8/13 (61.5%)
Web scraping and office document processing 5/10 (50.0%) 5/10 (50.0%) 5/10 (50.0%) 0/5 (0.0%) 3/5 (60.0%) 3/5 (60.0%)
Data analysis 6/22 (27.3%) 17/22 (77.3%) 18/22 (81.8%) 0/5 (0.0%) 2/5 (40.0%) 2/5 (20.0%)
Course Total 61/152 91/152 120/152 25/81 53/81 64/81
(40.1%) (59.9%) (78.9%) (30.9%) (65.4%) (79.0%)
The second replace() function call replaces the first
occurrence of ", me" with " different". The new string
becomes: "The things that make me different are the
things that make me, me. "
This is not true as the call to the replace function replaces all
matching strings. GPT-4 explains this aspect of the question correctly when asked in isolation:
This code will output a modified version of the quote
string where every occurrence of the substring “, me”
is replaced with the string “ different”. [...] “The things
that make me different are the things that make me
different. ”
Another commonly occurring failure due to multi-hop reasoning
seems to be related to interference between subparts of a question.
For example, one question defines a function called mystery that
does a series of edits and permutations on a list. The choices list
four calls to this function, each with a proposed output, and asks
the student to identify which of the pairs is correct. Unlike the true
“multi-hop” questions, these do not build on each other, but they
nonetheless seem to interact. GPT-4 can explain the function in
isolation and identify the correct result. However, when the four
choices are posed together for verification, it identifies all four of
them as correct, even though only one is in fact correct.
Unlikely failure (FLUKE) For MCQs, we set temperature to 0
as we were explicitly focused on running a reproducible experiment,
capturing the performance of the most likely output of the model.

[TABLE page=9 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Quizzes | Unnamed: 2 | Tests | Unnamed: 3
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Module Topic | Unnamed: 1: GPT-3 | Quizzes: GPT-3.5 GPT-4 | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3 | Tests: GPT-3.5 | Unnamed: 3: GPT-4
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: Introduction to Python and programming | Unnamed: 1: 8/10 (80.0%) | Quizzes: 10/10 (100%) 10/10 (100%) | Unnamed: 2: 6/10 (60.0%) | Tests: 9/10 (90.0%) | Unnamed: 3: 10/10 (100%)
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Data types, variables, I/O, operators | Unnamed: 1: 6/10 (60.0%) | Quizzes: 10/10 (100%) 10/10 (100%) | Unnamed: 2: 6/20 (30.0%) | Tests: 10/20 (50.0%) | Unnamed: 3: 18/20 (90.0%)
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Booleans, conditionals, loops, operators | Unnamed: 1: 3/10 (30.0%) | Quizzes: 7/10 (70.0%) 10/10 (100%) | Unnamed: 2: 6/20 (30.0%) | Tests: 12/20 (60.0%) | Unnamed: 3: 16/20 (80.0%)
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Functions, data structures, exceptions | Unnamed: 1: 6/12 (50.0%) | Quizzes: 9/12 (75.0%) 9/12 (75.0%) | Unnamed: 2: 7/22 (31.8%) | Tests: 12/22 (54.5%) | Unnamed: 3: 20/22 (90.9%)
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: Completion (Summary Test) | Unnamed: 1: - | Quizzes: - - | Unnamed: 2: 7/35 (20.0%) | Tests: 17/35 (48.6%) | Unnamed: 3: 27/35 (77.1%)
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: Course Total | Unnamed: 1: 23/42 | Quizzes: 36/42 39/42 | Unnamed: 2: 32/107 | Tests: 60/107 | Unnamed: 3: 91/107
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: (54.8%) | Quizzes: (85.7%) (92.4%) | Unnamed: 2: (29.9%) | Tests: (56.1%) | Unnamed: 3: (85.0%)
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: Table 4: PE2 results. The graded assignments are colored; green and check mark indicates passing while red means failing. | Unnamed: 1: | Quizzes: | Unnamed: 2: | Tests: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Quizzes: Quizzes | Unnamed: 2: | Tests: Tests | Unnamed: 3:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: Module Topic | Unnamed: 1: GPT-3 | Quizzes: GPT-3.5 GPT-4 | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3 | Tests: GPT-3.5 | Unnamed: 3: GPT-4
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: Modules, packages, and PIP 3/10 (30.0%) | Unnamed: 1: 6/10 (60.0%) | Quizzes: 10/10 (100%) 10/18 (55.6%) | Unnamed: 2: | Tests: 14/18 (77.8%) | Unnamed: 3: 17/18 (94.4%)
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: Strings, string list methods, exceptions 7/10 (70.0%) | Unnamed: 1: 6/10 (60.0%) | Quizzes: 9/10 (90.0%) | Unnamed: 2: 4/15 (26.7%) | Tests: 11/15 (73.3%) | Unnamed: 3: 13/15 (86.7%)
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: Object-oriented programming 7/10 (70.0%) | Unnamed: 1: 8/10 (80.0%) | Quizzes: 9/10 (90.0%) | Unnamed: 2: 4/17 (23.5%) | Tests: 12/17 (70.6%) | Unnamed: 3: 15/17 (82.4%)
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: Miscellaneous 8/12 (66.7%) | Unnamed: 1: 9/12 (75.0%) | Quizzes: 11/12 (91.7%) | Unnamed: 2: 4/16 (25.0%) | Tests: 9/16 (56.2%) | Unnamed: 3: 15/16 (93.8%)
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: Completion (Summary Test) | Unnamed: 1: - | Quizzes: - - 11/40 (27.5%) | Unnamed: 2: | Tests: 26/40 (65.0%) | Unnamed: 3: 35/40 (87.5%)
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: Course Total | Unnamed: 1: 25/42 | Quizzes: 29/42 40/42 | Unnamed: 2: 33/106 | Tests: 72/106 | Unnamed: 3: 95/106
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: (59.5%) | Quizzes: (69.0%) (95.2%) | Unnamed: 2: (31.1%) | Tests: (67.9%) | Unnamed: 3: (89.6%)
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: Table 5: PPP results. The tests contribute to the grade, typically by no more than 20%. Since in PPP tests themselves do no | Unnamed: 1: | Quizzes: | Unnamed: 2: | Tests: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: determine pass or fail no colors are used. | Unnamed: 1: | Quizzes: | Unnamed: 2: | Tests: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Quizzes: Quizzes | Unnamed: 2: | Tests: Tests | Unnamed: 3:
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: Module Topic | Unnamed: 1: GPT-3 | Quizzes: GPT-3.5 GPT-4 | Unnamed: 2: GPT-3 | Tests: GPT-3.5 | Unnamed: 3: GPT-4
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: Python basics and introduction to functions | Unnamed: 1: 12/30 (40.0%) | Quizzes: 21/30 (70.0%) 27/30 (90.0%) | Unnamed: 2: 4/12 (33.3%) | Tests: 9/12 (75.0%) | Unnamed: 3: 10/12 (83.3%)
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: Control flow, strings, input and output | Unnamed: 1: 8/22 (36.4%) | Quizzes: 10/22 (45.5%) 16/22 (72.7%) | Unnamed: 2: 3/11 (27.3%) | Tests: 8/11 (72.7%) | Unnamed: 3: 10/11 (90.9%)
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: Python data structures | Unnamed: 1: 9/18 (50.0%) | Quizzes: 10/18 (55.6%) 14/18 (77.8%) | Unnamed: 2: 4/14 (28.6%) | Tests: 9/14 (64.3%) | Unnamed: 3: 10/14 (71.4%)
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: Object-oriented programming | Unnamed: 1: 6/14 (42.9%) | Quizzes: 7/14 (50.0%) 11/14 (77.6%) | Unnamed: 2: 4/11 (36.4%) | Tests: 10/11 (90.9%) | Unnamed: 3: 11/11 (100%)
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: Software development | Unnamed: 1: 9/19 (47.4%) | Quizzes: 12/19 (63.2%) 16/19 (84.2%) | Unnamed: 2: 5/10 (50.0%) | Tests: 7/10 (70.0%) | Unnamed: 3: 10/10 (100%)
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: Data manipulation | Unnamed: 1: 6/17 (35.3%) | Quizzes: 9/17 (52.9%) 13/17 (76.5%) | Unnamed: 2: 5/13 (38.5%) | Tests: 5/13 (35.5%) | Unnamed: 3: 8/13 (61.5%)
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: Web scraping and office document processing | Unnamed: 1: 5/10 (50.0%) | Quizzes: 5/10 (50.0%) 5/10 (50.0%) | Unnamed: 2: 0/5 (0.0%) | Tests: 3/5 (60.0%) | Unnamed: 3: 3/5 (60.0%)
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: Data analysis | Unnamed: 1: 6/22 (27.3%) | Quizzes: 17/22 (77.3%) 18/22 (81.8%) | Unnamed: 2: 0/5 (0.0%) | Tests: 2/5 (40.0%) | Unnamed: 3: 2/5 (20.0%)
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: Course Total | Unnamed: 1: 61/152 | Quizzes: 91/152 120/152 | Unnamed: 2: | Tests: 25/81 53/81 | Unnamed: 3: 64/81
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: (40.1%) | Quizzes: (59.9%) (78.9%) | Unnamed: 2: (30.9%) | Tests: (65.4%) | Unnamed: 3: (79.0%)
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 10]
ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA Savelka et al.
Table 6: Performance of the GPT models across MCQs of
different types.
Question Type GPT-3 GPT-3.5 GPT-4
No Code
True/False 13/25 20/25 23/25
(52.0%) (80.0%) (92.0%)
Identify True/False Statement 12/44 27/44 35/44
(27.3%) (61.4%) (79.5%)
Finish Statement 42/56 50/56 56/56
(75.0%) (89.3%) (1.0%)
Other 25/47 37/47 43/47
(53.2%) (78.7%) (91.5%)
Total 92/172 134/172 157/172
(53.5%) (77.9%) (91.3%)
With Code
True/False 12/23 10/23 13/23
(52.2%) (43.5%) (56.5%)
Identify True/False Statement 10/26 11/26 16/26
(38.5%) (42.3%) (61.5%)
Output 28/110 53/110 86/110
(25.4%) (48.2%) (78.2%)
Fill-in 5/13 11/13 12/13
(38.5%) (84.6%) (92.3%)
Finish Statement 10/27 22/27 25/27
(37.0%) (81.5%) (92.6%)
Other 42/159 106/159 139/159
(26.4%) (66.7%) (87.4%)
Total 107/358 213/358 291/358
(29.9%) (59.5%) (81.3%)
Overall 199/530 347/530 448/530
(37.5%) (65.5%) (84.5%)
Table 7: Qualitative coding of wrong GPT-4 code MCQ answers
Code Definition # Q
WRONG-Q GPT’s explanation revealed a
valid interpretation suggesting
that the question itself was ambiguous
MULTI-HOP Model was confused by multihop reasoning.
FLUKE GPT only gets the question
wrong when temperature=0
DUALINTERPRETATION
The text of the code did not
match its intent, and GPT sometimes relied on the intent
INCOHERENT GPT answers are variable and
inconsistent
Setting a higher temperature and taking the most common of
several answers could be a way to achieve more reliably correct performance. We marked as FLUKE any questions that GPT-4 got right
with temperature being set higher. This is because in this case the
incorrect handling is associated with a particular parametrization
of the model.
Reasoning biased by inferred code intent (DUAL-INTERP)
GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent
rather than the exact nature of the code itself. For example, in one
question, a calculation is performed but the last line, printing out
the result, is commented out. GPT-4 answered as if the line were not
commented out. If asked to explain the reasoning step-by-step, GPT4 sometimes caught its mistake. GPT-4 is optimized for dialog, in
which humans do the best to make sense of inconsistent inputs; we
infer the most plausible coherent interpretation of an interlocutor.
A debugging-focused question that asks about unintended behavior
from subtly wrong code is interpreted as if the code were “correct”.
The same robust ability to interpret intent that lets it answer poorlyworded English questions apparently trips it up in questions about
purposefully misleading code.
Inconsistent reasoning (INCOHERENT) GPT-4 sometimes
gives different answers when queried repeatedly withtemperature
> 0. When providing reasons, it may give contradictory answers
within the same response. For example, one question asked if the
expression not (mag < 5) would be correct in a program with
multiple blanks, at a point where values >= 6 have already been
ruled out. GPT-4 incorrectly responds “The suggested expression
not (mag < 5) is not accurate because it will also include magnitudes of 6.0 and higher. ” However, it then gives the completed
code, using the logically equivalent expression mag > 5.0 . It explains that “should be mag >= 5.0, as this accurately identifies the
"Moderate" category without including higher magnitude levels. ”
Other responses contained similar contradictions.
5.3 (RQ3) To what degree can GPT-4 produce
solutions to complex coding tasks?
The results of applying the GPT models to the coding activities
are reported in Table 8. While the GPT-3.5 model obtained 407
points from the available 760 (53.6%) after a single submission to
each activity GPT-4 collected 545 points (71.7%). While there is
no stable grading scheme for PPP it is fair to anticipate that the
performance of GPT-3.5 on MCQ tests (65.4%) and projects (54.6%)
would typically not be deemed sufficient for passing the course. On
the other hand, the performance of GPT-4, i.e., 79% on the MCQ
tests and 71.7% on the projects, comes dangerously close if not all
the way towards actually passing the course. Hence, the findings
reported in [46] appear to be challenged by the more capable GPT-4
model as well as the findings reported in [7, 10, 11, 38].
We observe that the performance of GPT-4 across the tasks
appears to be related to the performance of GPT-3.5. That is to say,
the tasks that were challenging for GPT-3.5 appear to be challenging
even for GPT-4. GPT-3.5 collected very low scores on the first
submission from projects 2 (40 points), 5 (4 points), 7 (20 points),
and 8 (11 points). While GPT-4 obtained somewhat higher scores (56,
14, 53 and 44 points respectively) these four projects remained the
most challenging. Hence, it appears that the workings of GPT-3.5
and GPT-4 with respect to the coding tasks are not fundamentally
different, despite GPT-4 being noticeably better performing. Hence,
the strengths and limitations reported in prior work [7, 10, 11, 38,
46] still hold to a certain degree.

[TABLE page=10 index=1]
Columns: Question Type GPT-3 | GPT-3.5 | GPT-4 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent
Row 1: Question Type GPT-3: No Code | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: rather than the exact nature of the code itself. For example, in one
Row 2: Question Type GPT-3: True/False 13/25 | GPT-3.5: 20/25 | GPT-4: 23/25 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: question, a calculation is performed but the last line, printing out
Row 3: Question Type GPT-3: (52.0%) | GPT-3.5: (80.0%) | GPT-4: (92.0%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: the result, is commented out. GPT-4 answered as if the line were not
Row 4: Question Type GPT-3: Identify True/False Statement 12/44 | GPT-3.5: 27/44 | GPT-4: 35/44 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: commented out. If asked to explain the reasoning step-by-step, GPTRow 5: Question Type GPT-3: (27.3%) | GPT-3.5: (61.4%) | GPT-4: (79.5%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: 4 sometimes caught its mistake. GPT-4 is optimized for dialog, in
Row 6: Question Type GPT-3: Finish Statement 42/56 | GPT-3.5: 50/56 | GPT-4: 56/56 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: which humans do the best to make sense of inconsistent inputs; we
Row 7: Question Type GPT-3: (75.0%) | GPT-3.5: (89.3%) | GPT-4: (1.0%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: infer the most plausible coherent interpretation of an interlocutor.
Row 8: Question Type GPT-3: Other 25/47 | GPT-3.5: 37/47 | GPT-4: 43/47 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: A debugging-focused question that asks about unintended behavior
Row 9: Question Type GPT-3: (53.2%) | GPT-3.5: (78.7%) | GPT-4: (91.5%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: from subtly wrong code is interpreted as if the code were “correct”.
Row 10: Question Type GPT-3: Total 92/172 | GPT-3.5: 134/172 | GPT-4: 157/172 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: The same robust ability to interpret intent that lets it answer poorlyRow 11: Question Type GPT-3: (53.5%) | GPT-3.5: (77.9%) | GPT-4: (91.3%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: worded English questions apparently trips it up in questions about
Row 12: Question Type GPT-3: With Code | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: purposefully misleading code.
Row 13: Question Type GPT-3: True/False 12/23 | GPT-3.5: 10/23 | GPT-4: 13/23 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: Inconsistent reasoning (INCOHERENT) GPT-4 sometimes
Row 14: Question Type GPT-3: (52.2%) | GPT-3.5: (43.5%) | GPT-4: (56.5%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: gives different answers when queried repeatedly with temperature
Row 15: Question Type GPT-3: Identify True/False Statement 10/26 | GPT-3.5: 11/26 | GPT-4: 16/26 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: > 0. When providing reasons, it may give contradictory answers
Row 16: Question Type GPT-3: (38.5%) | GPT-3.5: (42.3%) | GPT-4: (61.5%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: within the same response. For example, one question asked if the
Row 17: Question Type GPT-3: Output 28/110 | GPT-3.5: 53/110 | GPT-4: 86/110 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: expression not (mag < 5) would be correct in a program with
Row 18: Question Type GPT-3: (25.4%) | GPT-3.5: (48.2%) | GPT-4: (78.2%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: multiple blanks, at a point where values >= 6 have already been
Row 19: Question Type GPT-3: Fill-in 5/13 | GPT-3.5: 11/13 | GPT-4: 12/13 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: ruled out. GPT-4 incorrectly responds “The suggested expression
Row 20: Question Type GPT-3: (38.5%) | GPT-3.5: (84.6%) | GPT-4: (92.3%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: not (mag < 5) is not accurate because it will also include magRow 21: Question Type GPT-3: Finish Statement 10/27 | GPT-3.5: 22/27 | GPT-4: 25/27 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: nitudes of 6.0 and higher.” However, it then gives the completed
Row 22: Question Type GPT-3: (37.0%) | GPT-3.5: (81.5%) | GPT-4: (92.6%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: code, using the logically equivalent expression mag > 5.0. It exRow 23: Question Type GPT-3: Other 42/159 | GPT-3.5: 106/159 | GPT-4: 139/159 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: plains that “should be mag >= 5.0, as this accurately identifies the
Row 24: Question Type GPT-3: (26.4%) | GPT-3.5: (66.7%) | GPT-4: (87.4%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: "Moderate" category without including higher magnitude levels.”
Row 25: Question Type GPT-3: Total 107/358 | GPT-3.5: 213/358 | GPT-4: 291/358 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: Other responses contained similar contradictions.
Row 26: Question Type GPT-3: (29.9%) | GPT-3.5: (59.5%) | GPT-4: (81.3%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent:
Row 27: Question Type GPT-3: Overall 199/530 | GPT-3.5: 347/530 | GPT-4: 448/530 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent:
Row 28: Question Type GPT-3: (RQ3) To what degree can GPT-4 produce(37.5%) | GPT-3.5: (65.5%) | GPT-4: (84.5%) | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: 5.3
Row 29: Question Type GPT-3: | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: solutions to complex coding tasks?
Row 30: Question Type GPT-3: | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: The results of applying the GPT models to the coding activities
Row 31: Question Type GPT-3: Table 7: Qualitative coding of wrong GPT-4 code MCQ an- | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: are reported in Table 8. While the GPT-3.5 model obtained 407
Row 32: Question Type GPT-3: swers | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: points from the available 760 (53.6%) after a single submission to
Row 33: Question Type GPT-3: | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: each activity GPT-4 collected 545 points (71.7%). While there is
Row 34: Question Type GPT-3: Code Definition | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: # Q | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: no stable grading scheme for PPP it is fair to anticipate that the
Row 35: Question Type GPT-3: WRONG-Q GPT’s explanation revealed a | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: 13 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: performance of GPT-3.5 on MCQ tests (65.4%) and projects (54.6%)
Row 36: Question Type GPT-3: valid interpretation suggesting | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: would typically not be deemed sufficient for passing the course. On
Row 37: Question Type GPT-3: that the question itself was am- | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: the other hand, the performance of GPT-4, i.e., 79% on the MCQ
Row 38: Question Type GPT-3: biguous | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: tests and 71.7% on the projects, comes dangerously close if not all
Row 39: Question Type GPT-3: MULTI-HOP Model was confused by multi- | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: 19 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: the way towards actually passing the course. Hence, the findings
Row 40: Question Type GPT-3: hop reasoning. | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: reported in [46] appear to be challenged by the more capable GPT-4
Row 41: Question Type GPT-3: FLUKE GPT only gets the question | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: 8 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: model as well as the findings reported in [7, 10, 11, 38].
Row 42: Question Type GPT-3: wrong when temperature=0 | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: We observe that the performance of GPT-4 across the tasks
Row 43: Question Type GPT-3: DUAL- The text of the code did not | GPT-3.5: | GPT-4: 13 | GPT-4 sometimes provided answers that focused on the intent: appears to be related to the performance of GPT-3.5. That is to say,
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 11]
Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer Struggle to Pass Assessments ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA
Table 8: Coding tasks results. Max score is the maximum score achievable from a task. First score is the score after first
submission. Resubs is the number of re-submissions after the first submission before the full score or no-change impasse were
reached. Final score is the score after feedback.
GPT-3.5 GPT-4
Project Topic Tasks (skills) Max 1st Resubs Final 1st Resubs Final
Types, variables, functions Variable assignment 13 13 0 13 13 0 13
User-defined functions, imports, return vs print 20 16 1 16 20 0 20
Simple scripts, comments 50 50 0 50 50 0 50
Testing 12 12 0 12 12 0 12
Project 1 Total 95 91 1 91 95 0 95
Iteration, conditionals, Conditional statements 10 10 0 10 10 0 10
strings, basic I/O Strings, while loop, for loop, complex printing 35 5 4 9 6 11 18
Read and write files 15 0 2 3 15 0 15
Complex script 35 25 1 25 25 1 25
Project 2 Total 95 40 7 47 56 12 68
Lists, sets, tuples and Create container, access, add, remove and update 40 38 1 40 40 0 40
dictionaries elements, and convert containers across types
Nested data structure, transformation, sorting, 55 30 3 40 55 0 55
export to file, complex report
Project 3 Total 95 68 4 80 95 0 95
Classes, objects, Implement classes 13 13 0 13 13 0 13
attributes and methods Define, access and set private attributes 19 19 0 19 19 0 19
Inheritance 20 20 0 20 20 0 20
Implement re-usable utility functions 16 16 0 16 16 0 16
Composition, object instantiation 16 16 0 16 16 0 16
Override special methods (repr, eq) 11 0 3 0 9 1 11
Project 4 Total 95 84 3 84 93 1 95
Debugging, refactoring, Identify and fix errors in code 10 0 2 0 5 2 5
testing and packaging Refactor larger code base 14 - - - - - Exception handling 13 4 2 4 4 2 13
Analyze and fix code on style correctness 28 0 10 0 0 23 14
Test-driven development 20 0 5 5 5 7 10
Package Python application using pip 10 - - - - - Project 5 Total 95 4 19 9 14 34 42
Files and datastores Load and store data in files 45 30 3 45 45 0 45
Create SQL objects, load and query data in SQL 30 30 0 30 30 0 30
Load and query data in MongoDB 20 20 0 20 20 0 20
Project 6 Total 95 80 3 95 95 0 95
Web scraping and office Get HTML, extract information from HTML, 35 5 10 18 33 1 35
document processing handle multiple HTML files
Manipulate Excel files programatically 25 5 4 5 5 4 5
Authenticate and utilize public API 15 0 1 0 15 0 15
Manipulate Word files programmatically 20 10 3 20 0 1 20
Project 7 Total 95 20 18 43 53 6 75
Data analysis Load data to pandas, merge pandas DataFrames, 35 11 3 11 24 2 24
persist pandas DataFrame
Assess data quality, examine descriptive statistics 40 0 3 25 0 1 25
Utilize regular expressions 20 0 1 20 20 0 20
Project 8 Total 95 11 7 56 44 3 69
Course Total 760 407 59 505 545 56 634
53.6% 66.4% 71.7% 83.4%

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | GPT-3.5 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | GPT-4 | Unnamed: 6
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Project Topic | Unnamed: 1: Tasks (skills) | Unnamed: 2: Max | Unnamed: 3: 1st | GPT-3.5: Resubs | Unnamed: 4: Final | Unnamed: 5: 1st | GPT-4: Resubs | Unnamed: 6: Final
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: Types, variables, functions | Unnamed: 1: Variable assignment | Unnamed: 2: 13 | Unnamed: 3: 13 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 13 | Unnamed: 5: 13 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 13
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: User-defined functions, imports, return vs print | Unnamed: 2: 20 | Unnamed: 3: 16 | GPT-3.5: 1 | Unnamed: 4: 16 | Unnamed: 5: 20 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 20
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Simple scripts, comments | Unnamed: 2: 50 | Unnamed: 3: 50 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 50 | Unnamed: 5: 50 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 50
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Testing | Unnamed: 2: 12 | Unnamed: 3: 12 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 12 | Unnamed: 5: 12 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 12
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Project 1 Total | Unnamed: 2: 95 | Unnamed: 3: 91 | GPT-3.5: 1 | Unnamed: 4: 91 | Unnamed: 5: 95 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 95
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: Iteration, conditionals, | Unnamed: 1: Conditional statements | Unnamed: 2: 10 | Unnamed: 3: 10 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 10 | Unnamed: 5: 10 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 10
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: strings, basic I/O | Unnamed: 1: Strings, while loop, for loop, complex printing | Unnamed: 2: 35 | Unnamed: 3: 5 | GPT-3.5: 4 | Unnamed: 4: 9 | Unnamed: 5: 6 | GPT-4: 11 | Unnamed: 6: 18
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Read and write files | Unnamed: 2: 15 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | GPT-3.5: 2 | Unnamed: 4: 3 | Unnamed: 5: 15 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 15
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Complex script | Unnamed: 2: 35 | Unnamed: 3: 25 | GPT-3.5: 1 | Unnamed: 4: 25 | Unnamed: 5: 25 | GPT-4: 1 | Unnamed: 6: 25
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Project 2 Total | Unnamed: 2: 95 | Unnamed: 3: 40 | GPT-3.5: 7 | Unnamed: 4: 47 | Unnamed: 5: 56 | GPT-4: 12 | Unnamed: 6: 68
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: Lists, sets, tuples and | Unnamed: 1: Create container, access, add, remove and update | Unnamed: 2: 40 | Unnamed: 3: 38 | GPT-3.5: 1 | Unnamed: 4: 40 | Unnamed: 5: 40 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 40
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: dictionaries | Unnamed: 1: elements, and convert containers across types | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | GPT-3.5: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | GPT-4: | Unnamed: 6:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Nested data structure, transformation, sorting, | Unnamed: 2: 55 | Unnamed: 3: 30 | GPT-3.5: 3 | Unnamed: 4: 40 | Unnamed: 5: 55 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 55
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: export to file, complex report | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | GPT-3.5: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | GPT-4: | Unnamed: 6:
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Project 3 Total | Unnamed: 2: 95 | Unnamed: 3: 68 | GPT-3.5: 4 | Unnamed: 4: 80 | Unnamed: 5: 95 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 95
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: Classes, objects, | Unnamed: 1: Implement classes | Unnamed: 2: 13 | Unnamed: 3: 13 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 13 | Unnamed: 5: 13 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 13
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: attributes and methods | Unnamed: 1: Define, access and set private attributes | Unnamed: 2: 19 | Unnamed: 3: 19 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 19 | Unnamed: 5: 19 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 19
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Inheritance | Unnamed: 2: 20 | Unnamed: 3: 20 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 20 | Unnamed: 5: 20 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 20
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Implement re-usable utility functions | Unnamed: 2: 16 | Unnamed: 3: 16 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 16 | Unnamed: 5: 16 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 16
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Composition, object instantiation | Unnamed: 2: 16 | Unnamed: 3: 16 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 16 | Unnamed: 5: 16 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 16
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Override special methods (repr, eq) | Unnamed: 2: 11 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | GPT-3.5: 3 | Unnamed: 4: 0 | Unnamed: 5: 9 | GPT-4: 1 | Unnamed: 6: 11
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Project 4 Total | Unnamed: 2: 95 | Unnamed: 3: 84 | GPT-3.5: 3 | Unnamed: 4: 84 | Unnamed: 5: 93 | GPT-4: 1 | Unnamed: 6: 95
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: Debugging, refactoring, | Unnamed: 1: Identify and fix errors in code | Unnamed: 2: 10 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | GPT-3.5: 2 | Unnamed: 4: 0 | Unnamed: 5: 5 | GPT-4: 2 | Unnamed: 6: 5
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: testing and packaging | Unnamed: 1: Refactor larger code base | Unnamed: 2: 14 | Unnamed: 3: - | GPT-3.5: - | Unnamed: 4: - | Unnamed: 5: - | GPT-4: - | Unnamed: 6: Row 26: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Exception handling | Unnamed: 2: 13 | Unnamed: 3: 4 | GPT-3.5: 2 | Unnamed: 4: 4 | Unnamed: 5: 4 | GPT-4: 2 | Unnamed: 6: 13
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Analyze and fix code on style correctness | Unnamed: 2: 28 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | GPT-3.5: 10 | Unnamed: 4: 0 | Unnamed: 5: 0 | GPT-4: 23 | Unnamed: 6: 14
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Test-driven development | Unnamed: 2: 20 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | GPT-3.5: 5 | Unnamed: 4: 5 | Unnamed: 5: 5 | GPT-4: 7 | Unnamed: 6: 10
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Package Python application using pip | Unnamed: 2: 10 | Unnamed: 3: - | GPT-3.5: - | Unnamed: 4: - | Unnamed: 5: - | GPT-4: - | Unnamed: 6: Row 30: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Project 5 Total | Unnamed: 2: 95 | Unnamed: 3: 4 | GPT-3.5: 19 | Unnamed: 4: 9 | Unnamed: 5: 14 | GPT-4: 34 | Unnamed: 6: 42
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: Files and datastores | Unnamed: 1: Load and store data in files | Unnamed: 2: 45 | Unnamed: 3: 30 | GPT-3.5: 3 | Unnamed: 4: 45 | Unnamed: 5: 45 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 45
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Create SQL objects, load and query data in SQL | Unnamed: 2: 30 | Unnamed: 3: 30 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 30 | Unnamed: 5: 30 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 30
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Load and query data in MongoDB | Unnamed: 2: 20 | Unnamed: 3: 20 | GPT-3.5: 0 | Unnamed: 4: 20 | Unnamed: 5: 20 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 20
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Project 6 Total | Unnamed: 2: 95 | Unnamed: 3: 80 | GPT-3.5: 3 | Unnamed: 4: 95 | Unnamed: 5: 95 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 95
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: Web scraping and office | Unnamed: 1: Get HTML, extract information from HTML, | Unnamed: 2: 35 | Unnamed: 3: 5 | GPT-3.5: 10 | Unnamed: 4: 18 | Unnamed: 5: 33 | GPT-4: 1 | Unnamed: 6: 35
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: document processing | Unnamed: 1: handle multiple HTML files | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | GPT-3.5: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | GPT-4: | Unnamed: 6:
Row 37: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Manipulate Excel files programatically | Unnamed: 2: 25 | Unnamed: 3: 5 | GPT-3.5: 4 | Unnamed: 4: 5 | Unnamed: 5: 5 | GPT-4: 4 | Unnamed: 6: 5
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Authenticate and utilize public API | Unnamed: 2: 15 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | GPT-3.5: 1 | Unnamed: 4: 0 | Unnamed: 5: 15 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 15
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Manipulate Word files programmatically | Unnamed: 2: 20 | Unnamed: 3: 10 | GPT-3.5: 3 | Unnamed: 4: 20 | Unnamed: 5: 0 | GPT-4: 1 | Unnamed: 6: 20
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Project 7 Total | Unnamed: 2: 95 | Unnamed: 3: 20 | GPT-3.5: 18 | Unnamed: 4: 43 | Unnamed: 5: 53 | GPT-4: 6 | Unnamed: 6: 75
Row 41: Unnamed: 0: Data analysis | Unnamed: 1: Load data to pandas, merge pandas DataFrames, | Unnamed: 2: 35 | Unnamed: 3: 11 | GPT-3.5: 3 | Unnamed: 4: 11 | Unnamed: 5: 24 | GPT-4: 2 | Unnamed: 6: 24
Row 42: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: persist pandas DataFrame | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | GPT-3.5: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | GPT-4: | Unnamed: 6:
Row 43: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Assess data quality, examine descriptive statistics | Unnamed: 2: 40 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | GPT-3.5: 3 | Unnamed: 4: 25 | Unnamed: 5: 0 | GPT-4: 1 | Unnamed: 6: 25
Row 44: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Utilize regular expressions | Unnamed: 2: 20 | Unnamed: 3: 0 | GPT-3.5: 1 | Unnamed: 4: 20 | Unnamed: 5: 20 | GPT-4: 0 | Unnamed: 6: 20
Row 45: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Project 8 Total | Unnamed: 2: 95 | Unnamed: 3: 11 | GPT-3.5: 7 | Unnamed: 4: 56 | Unnamed: 5: 44 | GPT-4: 3 | Unnamed: 6: 69
Row 46: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Course Total | Unnamed: 2: 760 | Unnamed: 3: 407 | GPT-3.5: 59 | Unnamed: 4: 505 | Unnamed: 5: 545 | GPT-4: 56 | Unnamed: 6: 634
Row 47: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 53.6% | GPT-3.5: | Unnamed: 4: 66.4% | Unnamed: 5: 71.7% | GPT-4: | Unnamed: 6: 83.4%
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 12]
ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA Savelka et al.
5.4 (RQ4) Can GPT-4 successfully utilize
feedback to fix solutions of coding tasks?
The coding tasks results after providing the models with feedback
are also reported in Table 8. The overall score achieved by the
GPT-3.5 model improved from 53.6% to 66.4%. The score would still
likely be too low for passing the course. GPT-4’s score increased
from 71.7% to 83.4%. This score would almost certainly enable a
human learner to pass the course. Hence, the ability of GPT-4 to
utilize feedback seems to be even stronger than the ability of the
GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no
requirement related to passing some minimal threshold for all of the
projects. Even after 34 feedback iterations on the project 6 coding
activities (debugging, refactoring, testing and packaging) GPT-4
obtained only 42 of the available 95 points. The low performance
on this particular project could be explained in terms of several
closely related factors. First, certain activities in this project could
not be performed at all because they involved use of external tools
beyond writing code. For example, the refactoring activities require
creating new files and directories as well as renaming and moving
files. The packaging activities involve interaction with the command
line. Note that it would be possible to equip LLMs, including GPT
models, with the ability to manipulate such external tools [ 30].
However, we did not consider the possibility in this study, and we
have simply refrained from attempting such activities. Similarly,
the remaining activities related to fixing errors, style correctness,
and testing heavily rely on external tools (i.e., the debugger,pylint,
pycodestyle, pytest). These activities were attempted since these
tools are not strictly required. However, this is problematic because
the feedback would often not contain all the necessary information.
For example, in the testing task the feedback contains the high-level
information about the test coverage (%). The models did not have
access to the full coverage report that would show the lines not
covered by the tests accessible to human learners.
Some of the coding activities were challenging for GPT-4 because they involved artifacts, beyond the task instructions, that
were crucial for generating correct solution. Often, human learners would not necessarily find such tasks particularly challenging.
One example of such an artifact is an input data set the size of
which exceeds the maximum length of the model’s prompt. While
human learners can simply inspect the large input data set and
identify the appropriate methods to parse the data as required by
the task specifications, GPT-4 was unable to solve the task based
on the instructions. By extracting sample records from the input
data set and providing the sample input along with the expected
output, GPT-4 was able to successfully implement the required data
transformation.
Finally, we observed that GPT-4, despite being more successful
than GPT-3.5, still struggles with fine-grained formatting requirements related to both, the output as well as the code itself. For
example, GPT-4 was able to utilize the feedback based on the output of the style-checker that the code contained long lines over
100 characters, and modified the code to shorten the lines. At the
same time, the model completely failed to utilize similar feedback
from a more strict style-checking tool complaining about the lines
that were over 79 characters long. In this particular case, GPT-4
was not able to break up a string that made the line in question 81
characters long. Similarly, when the provided feedback complained
about a missing white-space between the | character and subsequent number in the task focused on printing a tabular report to
a terminal, the GPT-4 model was not able to correct the solution
accordingly.
6 IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING PRACTICE
This study provides evidence that programming instructors need
to prepare for a world in which there is an easy-to-use widely
accessible technology that can be utilized by learners to collect
passing scores, with no effort whatsoever, on what today counts as
viable programming knowledge and skills assessments. While this
development has been apparent from the growing body of prior
work [7, 10, 11, 38, 46] this paper is the strongest evidence reported
so far in the context of programming education, and it is consistent
with the OpenAI’s GPT-4 release report [35].
In consequence, the instructors may consider shifting the focus
from assessment to learning, i.e., they should prioritize the learning
experience and skills development, rather than merely preparing
learners for assessments. The learners should be encouraged to
focus on learning and growth, rather than on always coming up
with the right answers. The importance of academic honesty and
ethical behavior in the classroom should be emphasized. Ideally,
a culture that values original work and personal effort should be
promoted. The instructors may need to move away from traditional
assessments, such as multiple-choice exams. Instead, they may
consider using more complex assessments such as code reviews,
pair programming, and oral examinations that require students to
demonstrate their understanding in real-time.
While it may be appealing to the instructors to understand the
limitations of GPT models when it comes to handling MCQs to
design tests that are difficult to be answered automatically we
argue that this is likely not a viable approach. Given the rate of
improvement over the past several years we document in this study,
it appears quite likely the existing limitations will be overcome
rather soon, reducing the effectiveness of tests designed to exploit
the identified weaknesses. Instead of trying to create “GPT-proof”
tests, it may be more productive to focus on developing assessments
focused on higher-order thinking skills, such as critical thinking,
problem-solving, and creativity as these are more difficult for the
GPT models to replicate.
In programming activities, we identified several use cases where
the application of GPT models does not (yet) appear to be straightforward. While similar argument as the one used for MCQs may
be employed against potential hardening of the coding tasks by
insisting on unusual fine-grained nuances of the code itself or its
output, re-designing the tasks to rely on artifacts beyond the instructions and/or employment of external tools may be promising.
This is because the ability to extract, consolidate, and express essential information from multiple sources may become an important
skill critical for success of future learners. Instructors may consider
incorporating such complex (but not necessary complicated) programming tasks requiring learners to consolidate problem context
from multiple sources. This approach could reduce the misuse while
promoting beneficial use of GPT models.

[TABLE page=12 index=1]
Columns: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need
Row 1: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: requirement related to passing someminimal threshold for all of the | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: to prepare for a world in which there is an easy-to-use widely
Row 2: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: projects. Even after 34 feedback iterations on the project 6 coding | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: accessible technology that can be utilized by learners to collect
Row 3: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: activities (debugging, refactoring, testing and packaging) GPT-4 | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: passing scores, with no effort whatsoever, on what today counts as
Row 4: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: obtained only 42 of the available 95 points. The low performance | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: viable programming knowledge and skills assessments. While this
Row 5: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: on this particular project could be explained in terms of several | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: development has been apparent from the growing body of prior
Row 6: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: closely related factors. First, certain activities in this project could | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: work [7, 10, 11, 38, 46] this paper is the strongest evidence reported
Row 7: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: not be performed at all because they involved use of external tools | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: so far in the context of programming education, and it is consistent
Row 8: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: beyond writing code. For example, the refactoring activities require | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: with the OpenAI’s GPT-4 release report [35].
Row 9: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: creating new files and directories as well as renaming and moving | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: In consequence, the instructors may consider shifting the focus
Row 10: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: files. The packaging activities involve interactionwith the command | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: from assessment to learning, i.e., they should prioritize the learning
Row 11: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: line. Note that it would be possible to equip LLMs, including GPT | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: experience and skills development, rather than merely preparing
Row 12: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: models, with the ability to manipulate such external tools [30]. | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: learners for assessments. The learners should be encouraged to
Row 13: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: However, we did not consider the possibility in this study, and we | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: focus on learning and growth, rather than on always coming up
Row 14: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: have simply refrained from attempting such activities. Similarly, | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: with the right answers. The importance of academic honesty and
Row 15: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: the remaining activities related to fixing errors, style correctness, | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: ethical behavior in the classroom should be emphasized. Ideally,
Row 16: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: and testing heavily rely on external tools (i.e., the debugger, pylint, | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: a culture that values original work and personal effort should be
Row 17: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: pycodestyle pytest, ). These activities were attempted since these | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: promoted. The instructors may need to move away from traditional
Row 18: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: tools are not strictly required. However, this is problematic because | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: assessments, such as multiple-choice exams. Instead, they may
Row 19: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: the feedback would often not contain all the necessary information. | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: consider using more complex assessments such as code reviews,
Row 20: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: For example, in the testing task the feedback contains the high-level | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: pair programming, and oral examinations that require students to
Row 21: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: information about the test coverage (%). The models did not have | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: demonstrate their understanding in real-time.
Row 22: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: access to the full coverage report that would show the lines not | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: While it may be appealing to the instructors to understand the
Row 23: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: covered by the tests accessible to human learners. | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: limitations of GPT models when it comes to handling MCQs to
Row 24: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: Some of the coding activities were challenging for GPT-4 be- | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: design tests that are difficult to be answered automatically we
Row 25: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: cause they involved artifacts, beyond the task instructions, that | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: argue that this is likely not a viable approach. Given the rate of
Row 26: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: were crucial for generating correct solution. Often, human learn- | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: improvement over the past several years we document in this study,
Row 27: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: ers would not necessarily find such tasks particularly challenging. | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: it appears quite likely the existing limitations will be overcome
Row 28: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: One example of such an artifact is an input data set the size of | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: rather soon, reducing the effectiveness of tests designed to exploit
Row 29: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: which exceeds the maximum length of the model’s prompt. While | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: the identified weaknesses. Instead of trying to create “GPT-proof”
Row 30: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: human learners can simply inspect the large input data set and | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: tests, it may be more productive to focus on developing assessments
Row 31: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: identify the appropriate methods to parse the data as required by | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: focused on higher-order thinking skills, such as critical thinking,
Row 32: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: the task specifications, GPT-4 was unable to solve the task based | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: problem-solving, and creativity as these are more difficult for the
Row 33: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: on the instructions. By extracting sample records from the input | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: GPT models to replicate.
Row 34: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: data set and providing the sample input along with the expected | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: In programming activities, we identified several use cases where
Row 35: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: output, GPT-4 was able to successfully implement the required data | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: the application of GPT models does not (yet) appear to be straightRow 36: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: transformation. | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: forward. While similar argument as the one used for MCQs may
Row 37: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: Finally, we observed that GPT-4, despite being more successful | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: be employed against potential hardening of the coding tasks by
Row 38: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: than GPT-3.5, still struggles with fine-grained formatting require- | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: insisting on unusual fine-grained nuances of the code itself or its
Row 39: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: ments related to both, the output as well as the code itself. For | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: output, re-designing the tasks to rely on artifacts beyond the inRow 40: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: example, GPT-4 was able to utilize the feedback based on the out- | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: structions and/or employment of external tools may be promising.
Row 41: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: put of the style-checker that the code contained long lines over | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: This is because the ability to extract, consolidate, and express essenRow 42: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: 100 characters, and modified the code to shorten the lines. At the | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: tial information from multiple sources may become an important
Row 43: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: same time, the model completely failed to utilize similar feedback | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: skill critical for success of future learners. Instructors may consider
Row 44: GPT-3.5 model evaluated in [38, 46]. That is, of course, if there is no: from a more strict style-checking tool complaining about the lines | This study provides evidence that programming instructors need: incorporating such complex (but not necessary complicated) pro-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 13]
Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer Struggle to Pass Assessments ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA
7 LIMITATIONS ANT THREATS TO V ALIDITY
Although, the results of our study provide important insights into
the evolving capabilities of the GPT models in passing typical assessments employed in introductory and intermediate Python classes,
limitations in several areas must be acknowledged.
Generalizability. While Python is a widely used and representative language, it is one of many languages used in programming
courses at the postsecondary level. GPT models have been shown
to handle a number of programming languages [5, 8]. Nevertheless,
our findings may not generalize to those languages with different
structures, syntax, and conventions. Secondly, while the programming assessments used in this study are typical of those found in
many Python programming courses, there may be other types of
assessments (e.g., open questions, oral exams). Finally, our study
was conducted using assessments in English, limiting the extent
to which the findings apply to programming assessments in other
languages. This poses a limitation as programming education is
a global endeavour, and a significant proportion of programming
courses and resources are available in languages other than English.
Prompt Engineering. The prompts employed in this study
were carefully crafted following the best practices. However, it is
important to acknowledge that our research did not explore the
effects of prompt engineering, i.e., further fine-tuning the initial
prompts. Engaging in prompt engineering could potentially lead
to even stronger performance of the models. This unexplored area
could limit the implications of our findings which should rather be
interpreted as lower bound of the performance.
Information on GPT Models. It is not well-known what data
have been used during the models’ training. This is important because LLMs such as the ones evaluated in this study have capacity
to memorize the data seen during their training. Hence, in case
the assessments would have been seen during the training our experiments would not be able to show the models’ capabilities to
pass the assessments. They would rather be a testament to their
memorization abilities. While we can be reasonably sure that the
assessments employed in this study were not seen during the training as they are not part of any publicly available data set, this is an
important limitation one has to be aware of when evaluating the
OpenaAI’s GPT models. Additional limitation is the lack of publicized technical details about GPT-4. The rapid development and
evolution of GPT models, coupled with a lack of available technical
details, makes it challenging for researchers to reproduce our study.
Therefore, the results should be interpreted with this lack of full
transparency and reproducibility in mind.
8 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We analyzed the capabilities of the GPT-4 model in passing typical
assessments, such as MCQ tests and coding exercises, in introductory and intermediate programming courses. The analysis is the
needed response to the recent release of GPT-4 evaluating the extent to which previous findings regarding GPT-3 and 3.5 models are
still relevant. The study highlights that the risk of learners becoming overly reliant on GPT models when completing programming
course assignments and assessments is a genuine concern that must
be taken seriously which is consistent with [ 1]. In light of these
findings, it is crucial to develop strategies to address this growing
challenge and maintain the relevance and integrity of programming
education.
The future work should focus on development of innovative
assessment techniques resilient to automatically generated solutions. This could include incorporating real-time problem-solving
components, group projects, or other collaborative activities that
require human interaction. Additionally, further studies of potential
benefits and risks associated with LLMs are needed to enable educators to harness their power while mitigating potential drawbacks.
Finally, as more capable LLMs continue to emerge, it is crucial to
conduct ongoing evaluations of their capabilities in the context
of programming education. This will ensure that educators and
institutions remain informed and prepared to adapt their teaching
methodologies and assessment strategies in response to the rapid
advancements.
REFERENCES
[1] Brett A Becker, Paul Denny, James Finnie-Ansley, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, James
Prather, and Eddie Antonio Santos. 2022. Programming Is Hard–Or at Least It
Used to Be: Educational Opportunities And Challenges of AI Code Generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/2212.01020 (2022).
[2] Jillian Bommarito, Michael Bommarito, Daniel Martin Katz, and Jessica Katz. 2023.
GPT as Knowledge Worker: A Zero-Shot Evaluation of (AI) CPA Capabilities.
arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/2301.04408 (2023).
[3] Michael Bommarito II and Daniel Martin Katz. 2022. GPT Takes the Bar Exam.
arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/2212.14402 (2022).
[4] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural
information processing systems 33 (2020), 1877–1901.
[5] Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric
Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha
Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. 2023. Sparks of Artificial
General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4. arXiv:2303.12712 [cs.CL]
[6] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira
Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman,
Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish
Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov,
Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe
Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis,
Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain,
William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam,
Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage,
Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam
McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating Large
Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/2107.03374 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2107.03374
[7] Paul Denny, Viraj Kumar, and Nasser Giacaman. 2023. Conversing with Copilot:
Exploring prompt engineering for solving CS1 problems using natural language.
In Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1. 1136–1142.
[8] Giuseppe Destefanis, Silvia Bartolucci, and Marco Ortu. 2023. A Preliminary
Analysis on the Code Generation Capabilities of GPT-3.5 and Bard AI Models for
Java Functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09402 (2023).
[9] Iddo Drori and Nakul Verma. 2021. Solving Linear Algebra by Program Synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08171 (2021). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2111.
[10] James Finnie-Ansley, Paul Denny, Brett A. Becker, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, and
James Prather. 2022. The Robots Are Coming: Exploring the Implications of
OpenAI Codex on Introductory Programming. In Australasian Computing Education Conference (Virtual Event, Australia) (ACE ’22). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 10–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3511861.3511863
[11] James Finnie-Ansley, Paul Denny, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, Eddie Antonio Santos,
James Prather, and Brett A Becker. 2023. My AI Wants to Know if This Will
Be on the Exam: Testing OpenAI’s Codex on CS2 Programming Exercises. In
Proceedings of the 25th Australasian Computing Education Conference . 97–104.
[12] Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. 2021. Making Pre-trained Language
Models Better Few-shot Learners. arXiv:2012.15723 [cs.CL]
[13] Amelia Gilson, Conrad W. Safranek, Tao Huang, Vimig Socrates, Lim Sze Chi,
Roderick A. Taylor, and David Chartash. 2022. How Well Does ChatGPT Do

[PAGE 14]
ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA Savelka et al.
When Taking the Medical Licensing Exams? The Implications of Large Language Models for Medical Education and Knowledge Assessment. In medRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.
[14] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn
Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2020. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/2009.03300 (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/
ARXIV.2009.03300
[15] Sajed Jalil, Suzzana Rafi, Thomas D. LaToza, Kevin Moran, and Wing Lam. 2023.
ChatGPT and Software Testing Education: Promises & Perils. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2302.03287 arXiv:2302.03287 [cs.SE]
[16] Wenxiang Jiao, Wenxuan Wang, Jen tse Huang, Xing Wang, and Zhaopeng
Tu. 2023. Is ChatGPT A Good Translator? Yes With GPT-4 As The Engine.
arXiv:2301.08745 [cs.CL]
[17] Anjan Karmakar, Julian Aron Prenner, Marco D’Ambros, and Romain Robbes.
2022. Codex Hacks HackerRank: Memorization Issues and a Framework for Code
Synthesis Evaluation. ArXiv abs/2212.02684 (2022).
[18] Daniel Martin Katz, Michael James Bommarito, Shang Gao, and Pablo Arredondo.
2023. GPT-4 Passes the Bar Exam. A vailable at SSRN 4389233 (2023).
[19] Majeed Kazemitabaar, Justin Chow, Carl Ka To Ma, Barbara J. Ericson, David
Weintrop, and Tovi Grossman. 2023. Studying the Effect of AI Code Generators
on Supporting Novice Learners in Introductory Programming. In Proceedings
of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg,
Germany) (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
Article 455, 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580919
[20] Donald Ervin Knuth. 1984. Literate programming. The computer journal 27, 2
(1984), 97–111.
[21] Dimitra Kokotsaki, Victoria Menzies, and Andy Wiggins. 2016. Project-based
learning: A review of the literature. Improving schools 19, 3 (2016), 267–277.
[22] Tiffany H Kung, Morgan Cheatham, Arielle Medinilla, Czarina Sillos, Lorie
De Leon, Camille Elepano, Marie Madriaga, Rimel Aggabao, Giezel Diaz-Candido,
James Maningo, et al. 2022. Performance of ChatGPT on USMLE: Potential for
AI-Assisted Medical Education Using Large Language Models. medRxiv preprint
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.19.22283643.
[23] Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang, and Eduard Hovy. 2017. Race:
Large-scale reading comprehension dataset from examinations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:abs/1704.04683 (2017).
[24] Juho Leinonen, Paul Denny, Stephen MacNeil, Sami Sarsa, Seth Bernstein, Joanne
Kim, Andrew Tran, and Arto Hellas. 2023. Comparing Code Explanations Created
by Students and Large Language Models. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.
03938 arXiv:2304.03938 [cs.CY]
[25] Juho Leinonen, Arto Hellas, Sami Sarsa, Brent Reeves, Paul Denny, James
Prather, and Brett A. Becker. 2023. Using Large Language Models to Enhance
Programming Error Messages. In Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 (Toronto ON, Canada) (SIGCSE
2023). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 563–569.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569770
[26] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi
Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas
Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen,
Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy,
Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas,
Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. 2022. Competition-level code generation
with AlphaCode. Science 378, 6624 (2022), 1092–1097. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.abq1158 arXiv:https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.abq1158
[27] Valentin Liévin, Christoffer Egeberg Hother, and Ole Winther. 2022. Can
large language models reason about medical questions? ArXiv preprint
arXiv:abs/2207.08143 (2022).
[28] Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tony Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun
Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. 2022. Learn to Explain:
Multimodal Reasoning via Thought Chains for Science Question Answering.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2209.09513
[29] Stephen MacNeil, Andrew Tran, Arto Hellas, Joanne Kim, Sami Sarsa, Paul
Denny, Seth Bernstein, and Juho Leinonen. 2023. Experiences from Using
Code Explanations Generated by Large Language Models in a Web Software
Development E-Book. In Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium
on Computer Science Education V. 1 (Toronto ON, Canada) (SIGCSE 2023). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 931–937. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569785
[30] Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram
Pasunuru, Roberta Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu,
Asli Celikyilmaz, et al . 2023. Augmented Language Models: a Survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.07842 (2023).
[31] Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2018. Can a suit
of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/1809.02789 (2018).
[32] Ahmad Haji Mohammadkhani, Chakkrit Kla Tantithamthavorn, and Hadi Hemmati. 2022. Explainable AI for Pre-Trained Code Models: What Do They Learn?
When They Do Not Work? ArXiv preprint arXiv:abs/2211.12821 (2022).
[33] Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv
Batra, Lucy Vanderwende, Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016. A corpus and
cloze evaluation for deeper understanding of commonsense stories. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies . 839–849.
[34] Nhan Nguyen and Sarah Nadi. 2022. An Empirical Evaluation of GitHub Copilot’s
Code Suggestions. In 2022 IEEE/ACM 19th International Conference on Mining
Software Repositories (MSR). 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1145/3524842.3528470
[35] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL]
[36] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela
Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv
preprint arXiv:abs/2203.02155 (2022).
[37] Neil Perry, Megha Srivastava, Deepak Kumar, and Dan Boneh. 2022. Do Users
Write More Insecure Code with AI Assistants? arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03622
(2022).
[38] Stephen R Piccolo, Paul Denny, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, Samuel Payne, and Perry G
Ridge. 2023. Many bioinformatics programming tasks can be automated with
ChatGPT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13528 (2023).
[39] James Prather, Brent N Reeves, Paul Denny, Brett A Becker, Juho Leinonen,
Andrew Luxton-Reilly, Garrett Powell, James Finnie-Ansley, and Eddie Antonio
Santos. 2023. " It’s Weird That it Knows What I Want": Usability and Interactions
with Copilot for Novice Programmers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02491 (2023).
[40] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. (2018).
[41] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya
Sutskever. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. (2019).
[42] Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. 2021. Prompt Programming for Large Language Models: Beyond the Few-Shot Paradigm. arXiv:2102.07350 [cs.CL]
[43] Joshua Robinson, Christopher Michael Rytting, and David Wingate. 2022. Leveraging Large Language Models for Multiple Choice Question Answering. arXiv
preprint arXiv:abs/2210.12353 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2210.12353
[44] Sami Sarsa, Paul Denny, Arto Hellas, and Juho Leinonen. 2022. Automatic
Generation of Programming Exercises and Code Explanations Using Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research - Volume 1 (Lugano and Virtual Event, Switzerland)
(ICER ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 27–43.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3501385.3543957
[45] Jaromir Savelka, Arav Agarwal, Christopher Bogart, and Majd Sakr. 2023. Large
Language Models (GPT) Struggle to Answer Multiple-Choice Questions about
Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08033 (2023).
[46] Jaromir Savelka, Arav Agarwal, Christopher Bogart, Yifan Song, and Majd Sakr.
2023. Can Generative Pre-trained Transformers (GPT) Pass Assessments in
Higher Education Programming Courses?. InProceedings of the 28th Annual ACM
Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education .
[47] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[48] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Huai hsin Chi,
F. Xia, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of Thought Prompting Elicits
Reasoning in Large Language Models. ArXiv abs/2201.11903 (2022).
[49] Guang Yang, Yu Zhou, Wenhua Yang, Tao Yue, Xiang Chen, and Taolue Chen.
2022. How Important are Good Method Names in Neural Code Generation? A
Model Robustness Perspective. ArXiv abs/2211.15844 (2022).
[50] Biao Zhang, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2023. Prompting Large Language Model for Machine Translation: A Case Study. ArXiv abs/2301.07069
(2023).
[51] Tony Z. Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. 2021.
Calibrate Before Use: Improving Few-Shot Performance of Language Models.
arXiv:2102.09690 [cs.CL]
[52] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Scharli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang,
Dale Schuurmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Huai hsin Chi. 2022. Leastto-Most Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in Large Language Models.ArXiv
abs/2205.10625 (2022).

[TABLE page=14 index=1]
Columns: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.
Row 1: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [14] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/1809.02789 (2018).
Row 2: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2020. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Under- | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [32] Ahmad Haji Mohammadkhani, Chakkrit Kla Tantithamthavorn, and Hadi HemRow 3: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: standing. arXiv preprint arXiv:abs/2009.03300 (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/ | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: mati. 2022. Explainable AI for Pre-Trained Code Models: What Do They Learn?
Row 4: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: ARXIV.2009.03300 | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: When They Do Not Work? ArXiv preprint arXiv:abs/2211.12821 (2022).
Row 5: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [15] Sajed Jalil, Suzzana Rafi, Thomas D. LaToza, Kevin Moran, and Wing Lam. 2023. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [33] Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv
Row 6: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: ChatGPT and Software Testing Education: Promises & Perils. https://doi.org/10. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Batra, Lucy Vanderwende, Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016. A corpus and
Row 7: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: 48550/arXiv.2302.03287 arXiv:2302.03287 [cs.SE] | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: cloze evaluation for deeper understanding of commonsense stories. In ProceedRow 8: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [16] Wenxiang Jiao, Wenxuan Wang, Jen tse Huang, Xing Wang, and Zhaopeng | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: ings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Row 9: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Tu. 2023. Is ChatGPT A Good Translator? Yes With GPT-4 As The Engine. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. 839–849.
Row 10: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: arXiv:2301.08745 [cs.CL] | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [34] Nhan Nguyen and Sarah Nadi. 2022. An Empirical Evaluation of GitHub Copilot’s
Row 11: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [17] Anjan Karmakar, Julian Aron Prenner, Marco D’Ambros, and Romain Robbes. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Code Suggestions. In 2022 IEEE/ACM 19th International Conference on Mining
Row 12: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: 2022. Codex Hacks HackerRank: Memorization Issues and a Framework for Code | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Software Repositories (MSR). 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1145/3524842.3528470
Row 13: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Synthesis Evaluation. ArXiv abs/2212.02684 (2022). | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [35] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL]
Row 14: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [18] Daniel Martin Katz, Michael James Bommarito, Shang Gao, and Pablo Arredondo. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [36] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela
Row 15: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: 2023. GPT-4 Passes the Bar Exam. Available at SSRN 4389233 (2023). | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022.
Row 16: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [19] Majeed Kazemitabaar, Justin Chow, Carl Ka To Ma, Barbara J. Ericson, David | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv
Row 17: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Weintrop, and Tovi Grossman. 2023. Studying the Effect of AI Code Generators | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: preprint arXiv:abs/2203.02155 (2022).
Row 18: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: on Supporting Novice Learners in Introductory Programming. In Proceedings | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [37] Neil Perry, Megha Srivastava, Deepak Kumar, and Dan Boneh. 2022. Do Users
Row 19: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Write More Insecure Code with AI Assistants? arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03622
Row 20: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Germany) (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: (2022).
Row 21: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Article 455, 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580919 | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [38] Stephen R Piccolo, Paul Denny, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, Samuel Payne, and Perry G
Row 22: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [20] Donald Ervin Knuth. 1984. Literate programming. The computer journal 27, 2 | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Ridge. 2023. Many bioinformatics programming tasks can be automated with
Row 23: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: (1984), 97–111. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: ChatGPT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13528 (2023).
Row 24: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [21] Dimitra Kokotsaki, Victoria Menzies, and Andy Wiggins. 2016. Project-based | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [39] James Prather, Brent N Reeves, Paul Denny, Brett A Becker, Juho Leinonen,
Row 25: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: learning: A review of the literature. Improving schools 19, 3 (2016), 267–277. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Andrew Luxton-Reilly, Garrett Powell, James Finnie-Ansley, and Eddie Antonio
Row 26: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [22] Tiffany H Kung, Morgan Cheatham, Arielle Medinilla, Czarina Sillos, Lorie | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Santos. 2023. " It’s Weird That it Knows What I Want": Usability and Interactions
Row 27: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: De Leon, Camille Elepano, Marie Madriaga, Rimel Aggabao, Giezel Diaz-Candido, | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: with Copilot for Novice Programmers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02491 (2023).
Row 28: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: James Maningo, et al. 2022. Performance of ChatGPT on USMLE: Potential for | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [40] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. 2018. ImRow 29: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: AI-Assisted Medical Education Using Large Language Models. medRxiv preprint | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: proving language understanding by generative pre-training. (2018).
Row 30: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: (2022). https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.19.22283643. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [41] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya
Row 31: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [23] Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang, and Eduard Hovy. 2017. Race: | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Sutskever. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. (2019).
Row 32: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Large-scale reading comprehension dataset from examinations. arXiv preprint | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [42] Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. 2021. Prompt Programming for Large LanRow 33: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: arXiv:abs/1704.04683 (2017). | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: guage Models: Beyond the Few-Shot Paradigm. arXiv:2102.07350 [cs.CL]
Row 34: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [24] Juho Leinonen, Paul Denny, Stephen MacNeil, Sami Sarsa, Seth Bernstein, Joanne | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [43] Joshua Robinson, Christopher Michael Rytting, and David Wingate. 2022. LeverRow 35: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Kim, Andrew Tran, and Arto Hellas. 2023. Comparing Code Explanations Created | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: aging Large Language Models for Multiple Choice Question Answering. arXiv
Row 36: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: by Students and Large Language Models. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: preprint arXiv:abs/2210.12353 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2210.12353
Row 37: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: 03938 arXiv:2304.03938 [cs.CY] | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [44] Sami Sarsa, Paul Denny, Arto Hellas, and Juho Leinonen. 2022. Automatic
Row 38: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [25] Juho Leinonen, Arto Hellas, Sami Sarsa, Brent Reeves, Paul Denny, James | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Generation of Programming Exercises and Code Explanations Using Large LanRow 39: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Prather, and Brett A. Becker. 2023. Using Large Language Models to Enhance | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: guage Models. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on International ComRow 40: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Programming Error Messages. In Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Sym- | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: puting Education Research - Volume 1 (Lugano and Virtual Event, Switzerland)
Row 41: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: posium on Computer Science Education V. 1 (Toronto ON, Canada) (SIGCSE | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: (ICER ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 27–43.
Row 42: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: 2023). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 563–569. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: https://doi.org/10.1145/3501385.3543957
Row 43: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: https://doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569770 | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [45] Jaromir Savelka, Arav Agarwal, Christopher Bogart, and Majd Sakr. 2023. Large
Row 44: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [26] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Language Models (GPT) Struggle to Answer Multiple-Choice Questions about
Row 45: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08033 (2023).
Row 46: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien deMasson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, XinyunChen, | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [46] Jaromir Savelka, Arav Agarwal, Christopher Bogart, Yifan Song, and Majd Sakr.
Row 47: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: 2023. Can Generative Pre-trained Transformers (GPT) Pass Assessments in
Row 48: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Higher Education Programming Courses?. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM
Row 49: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. 2022. Competition-level code generation | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education.
Row 50: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: with AlphaCode. Science 378, 6624 (2022), 1092–1097. https://doi.org/10.1126/ | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [47] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Row 51: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: science.abq1158 arXiv:https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.abq1158 | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
Row 52: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [27] Valentin Liévin, Christoffer Egeberg Hother, and Ole Winther. 2022. Can | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
Row 53: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: large language models reason about medical questions? ArXiv preprint | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [48] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Huai hsin Chi,
Row 54: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: arXiv:abs/2207.08143 (2022). | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: F. Xia, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of Thought Prompting Elicits
Row 55: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [28] Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tony Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Reasoning in Large Language Models. ArXiv abs/2201.11903 (2022).
Row 56: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. 2022. Learn to Explain: | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [49] Guang Yang, Yu Zhou, Wenhua Yang, Tao Yue, Xiang Chen, and Taolue Chen.
Row 57: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Multimodal Reasoning via Thought Chains for Science Question Answering. | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: 2022. How Important are Good Method Names in Neural Code Generation? A
Row 58: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2209.09513 | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Model Robustness Perspective. ArXiv abs/2211.15844 (2022).
Row 59: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [29] Stephen MacNeil, Andrew Tran, Arto Hellas, Joanne Kim, Sami Sarsa, Paul | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [50] Biao Zhang, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2023. Prompting Large LanRow 60: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Denny, Seth Bernstein, and Juho Leinonen. 2023. Experiences from Using | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: guage Model for Machine Translation: A Case Study. ArXiv abs/2301.07069
Row 61: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Code Explanations Generated by Large Language Models in a Web Software | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: (2023).
Row 62: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: Development E-Book. In Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [51] Tony Z. Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. 2021.
Row 63: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: on Computer Science Education V. 1 (Toronto ON, Canada) (SIGCSE 2023). As- | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Calibrate Before Use: Improving Few-Shot Performance of Language Models.
Row 64: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 931–937. https: | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: arXiv:2102.09690 [cs.CL]
Row 65: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: //doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569785 | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: [52] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Scharli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang,
Row 66: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.23.22283901.: [30] Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram | of armor conduct electricity? A new dataset for open book question answering.: Dale Schuurmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Huai hsin Chi. 2022. Least-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 15]
Large Language Models (GPT-4) No Longer Struggle to Pass Assessments ICER ’23 V1, August 7–11, 2023, Chicago, IL, USA
A MCQ EXAMPLES PER TYPES
True/False
Developers that write code individually are not expected to apply
code standards.
A. True
B. False
Evaluate the following expression and determine whether it is True
or False.
2 + 2 != 2 * 2
A. True
B. False
Identify True/False Statement
Which of the following statements is false?
A. The pandas module provides some CSV-related methods.
B. Python has a built-in XML package with several modules for
XML parsing.
C. JSON data format has syntax to represent all Python data structure
types.
D. Python has a built-in csv module containing methods for reading and writing into CSV files.
Take a look at the snippet and choose one of the following statements which is true:
nums = []
vals = nums[:]
vals.append(1)
A. nums is longer than ‘vals‘
B. vals is longer than nums
C. nums and vals are of the same length
Finish Statement
The ‘**‘ operator:
A. performs duplicated multiplication
B. does not exist
C. performs exponentiation
Right-sided binding means that the following expression:
1 ** 2 ** 3
will be evaluated:
A. from right to left
B. in random order
C. from left to right
Output
What is the output of the following snippet if the user enters two
lines containing 2 and 4 respectively?
x = int(input())
y = int(input())
print(x + y)
A. 2
B. 24
C. 6
What is the output of the following snippet?
my_list_1 = [1, 2, 3]
my_list_2 = []
for v in my_list_1:
my_list_2.insert(0, v)
print(my_list_2)
A. [1, 2, 3]
B. [1, 1, 1]
C. [3, 3, 3]
D. [3, 2, 1]
Fill-in Blanks
Fill in the blank of the is_negative function definition shown below, so that the function returnsTrue when the argument provided
to num is a negative number and returns False otherwise.
def is_negative(num):
return _________________
A. not (num > 0)
B. num > 0
C. num <= 0
D. num < 0
The following code snippet should open the myfile file and assign
the lines to the all_lines variable. Which of the options below
should be used to fill in the blanks?
with __________________________
all_lines = file.readlines()
A. open("myfile",’r’) as file:
B. "myfile" in open as file:
C. with open "myfile" as file:
Other
How many times will the code snippet below print ‘X‘?
for i in range(1, 7):
for j in range(2, 6):
print('X')
A. 24
B. 28
C. 35
Given the piece of code presented in the code snippet below, what
is the value of palindromes[1]?
palindromes = [ 'pop', 'noon', 'madam']
A. 'pop'
B. 'noon'
C. 'p'
D. 'madam'
E. 'o'