[PAGE 1]
Large Language Models as Sous Chefs: Revising Recipes with GPT-3
Alyssa Hwang∗ and Bryan Li∗ and Zhaoyi Hou∗ and Dan Roth
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
{ahwang16, bryanli, joeyhou, danroth}@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
With their remarkably improved text generation and prompting capabilities, large language
models can adapt existing written information
into forms that are easier to use and understand.
In our work, we focus on recipes as an example of complex, diverse, and widely used
instructions. We develop a prompt grounded
in the original recipe and ingredients list that
breaks recipes down into simpler steps. We apply this prompt to recipes from various world
cuisines, and experiment with several large language models (LLMs), finding best results with
GPT-3.5. We also contribute an Amazon Mechanical Turk task that is carefully designed
to reduce fatigue while collecting human judgment of the quality of recipe revisions. We find
that annotators usually prefer the revision over
the original, demonstrating a promising application of LLMs in serving as digital sous chefs
for recipes and beyond. We release our prompt,
code1, and MTurk template2 for public use.
1 Introduction
We have access to vast amounts of written information, but many of these resources are written in
different styles, levels of complexity, and domains.
Previous work in adapting information to be easier
to use and understand have relied on advances in
general knowledge, event reasoning, text simplification, and other subtasks in Natural Language
Processing. Today, the tremendous improvement
in large language models, especially their zero-shot
prompting and in-context learning capabilities, has
made it easier than ever to leverage NLP research
for user-centered goals.
Our work focuses on revising food recipes as
a key use case for adapting written information.
∗ Equal contribution
1https://github.com/manestay/
project2-complex-tasks
2https://github.com/ahwang16/mturk-templates/
tree/master/compare_recipes
Recipes are abundant, diverse, and widely used,
making them a prime candidate to explore how
well GPT-3.5 (Brown et al., 2020)—one of the currently most powerful LLMs—can handle them. For
each recipe sampled across various world cuisines,
we ask GPT-3.5 to use the original recipe and ingredients list to produce an adaptation that is easier
to follow.
We rely on human judgment collected through
a carefully designed task on Amazon Mechanical
Turk to evaluate revised recipes. Instead of displaying original and revised recipes side by side
and asking annotators to evaluate many parts of
both at once, we simplify the process by displaying
one step at a time. Beyond general usability, we
ask annotators to identify new, missing, or incorrect information in a revised recipe. GPT-3.5 often
introduces new information to clarify implicit information. This new information can be classified
as either a ‘hallucination’, which is detrimental to
generation quality, or an ‘elaboration’, which is
helpful for end-users.
Our work makes these three key contributions:
1. We propose the task of using LLMs to improve the presentation of complex, written
information. Specifically, we prompt an LLM
to revise a given recipe.
2. We describe our experimentation to design a
successful prompt. We find that by including grounding information (here the original
recipe and list of ingredients) in the prompt,
LLM generations will emphasize helpful elaborations over detrimental hallucinations.
3. We design a human evaluation task that enables annotators to make granular, step-bystep comparisons between the original and
revised recipes. This granularity both reduces
the mental strain of annotation and allows for
step-level analysis of the model’s revisions.
We find that annotators prefer revised recipes.
arXiv:2306.13986v1 [cs.CL] 24 Jun 2023

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: that annotators usually prefer the revision over | rect information in a revised recipe. GPT-3.5 often
Row 1: that annotators usually prefer the revision over: the original, demonstrating a promising appli- | rect information in a revised recipe. GPT-3.5 often: introduces new information to clarify implicit in-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
2 Methods
2.1 Data
We consider the Recipes1M+ dataset (Marin et al.,
2019; Salvador et al., 2017), which consists of
over a million multimodal recipes collected from
across the internet. For the purposes of this
work, we use stratified random sampling to select a 100-recipe subset. First, we manually
select 10 Recipes1M+ class attributes (which
are frequent ngrams occurring in recipe titles):
[couscous salad, apple pie, clam chowder,
lentil soup, chicken enchiladas, beef
stroganoff, coconut macaroons, chow mein,
pad thai, paella] . These attributes are diverse
with respect to world cuisine, course, and preparation methods. For each attribute, we then sample 5
long recipes (11-16 steps) and 5 short recipes (5-10
steps). This follows from the length distribution
of the full Recipes1M+ dataset, which peaks at 10
steps. The resultant subset consists of 100 recipes.
2.2 Large Language Models Used
We start with two models for recipe revision:
text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-003.3 After a manual evaluation of several pilot generations,
we move forward with text-davinci-003. Anecdotally, we observe thattext-davinci-003 writes
slightly more informative steps and follows prompt
instructions better.
2.3 Prompting Approach
We now present our approach to prompting an LLM
to generate clear, executable recipes. We first cover
our final, most successful prompt. We then discuss
insights from prior experimentation that led to it.
Our most successful prompt, depicted in Figure 1, consists of three sections: instructions, a set
of ingredients, and the original recipe.
Instructions The instructions are verbose (163
words) to ensure the task is as well defined as possible. The list of “Valid operations” allows the
model to make a diverse set of revisions, while
the “demonstrations” clarify how texts are transformed. We find that separating the operations and
demonstrations produced the best results.
We also add clarifications in parentheses to catch
some problem cases, e.g. “example: for a salad
dish, no need to bake it” (though there is still no
guarantee against hallucinations).
3https://platform.openai.com/playground
You are tasked with revising a food recipe, given a
set of ingredients and the original steps. Make sure
each generated step is executable (example: do not say
"Enjoy!") and not too complex. Ensure that your steps still
make the same dish as the original steps (example: for a
salad dish, no need to bake it).
Valid operations:
A) Keep a step the same
B) Delete a unneeded step
C) Revise a unclear step
D) Split a complex step into multiple steps
E) Add a step to improve clarity
F) Combine two steps which go together
Here are demonstrations, formatted as "[input]" ->
"[output]":
A) "Simmer for 30 minutes" -> "Simmer for 30 minutes"
B) "Enjoy!" -> [null (always)]
C) "Add the veggies" -> "Add in the peas and mushrooms"
D) "Knead the dough, and let rise overnight" -> "Knead
the dough" + "Let it rise overnight"
E) [null (when implied)] -> "Preheat the oven to 350 F"
F) "Stir in potatoes" + "Stir in carrots" -> "Stir in potatoes
and carrots"
---
[title]
---
* Water
...
--Original Recipe
1. Boil the water.
...
--Revised Recipe
1.
Figure 1: The prompt used to elicit an LLM to revise a
recipe. san serif texts are filled in per recipe, while serif
text is consistent across recipes. The text is color coded
as: Instructions (black), Ingredients, Original Recipe.
Ingredients Including the ingredients gives the
model more information to base its revision decisions on. Ingredients are given in a bulleted list,
which is generally between 50 and 100 words.
Original Recipe The original steps are given in
a numbered list and vary widely in terms of style,
length, and formatting.
2.4 Preliminary Prompting Experiments
To arrive at this formulation, we experimented with
several versions of the prompt and task.
Direct Generation Our initial task was to ask the
LLM to generate a recipe with just the name of the
dish. We thought this might work reasonably well,
given that models such as GPT-3 have very likely
seen many instances of food recipes during training. We provided a one-sentence instruction and
the recipe title. We then experimented by eliciting

[PAGE 3]
completions for prompt configurations: comparing zero-shot and few-shot prompts and varying
the presence of the ingredients list, for a total of
four experimental settings. For the few-shot setting,
each prompt uses two randomly sampled examples
from the larger set of recipes for the dishes of interest. As found by Patel et al. (2023), prompts with
dynamically sampled examples allow for more diverse generations as opposed to static examples.
We found that including ingredients greatly improved the faithfulness of the generated recipe to
the dish. For example, when generating a recipe for
“low-fat and dairy-free clam chowder,” the prompts
without ingredients tended to use coconut milk
(which is assuredly not low-fat). When the original
ingredients were included, the generations would
correctly use soy or rice milk. When including
few-shot examples, we found that the examples
mostly affected the style of the output text while
the content seemed to be roughly the same.
We noticed that in all four configurations, the
model struggled to account for modifications or
qualifications and tended towards a more generic
dish. For example, the generation for “mini apple
pies” says to only make 1 large pie. Furthermore,
many recipes may sound reasonable but actually
make a different dish. The generation for “paleo
paella,” for instance, says to use cauliflowerflorets
as a base, but paella is a rice dish, so the paleo
variant should use riced cauliflower. Such issues
are especially problematic as they require domain
knowledge which home cooks may lack, which
would result them making dishes different from
their initial intent.
A further complication when designing a human
evaluation task for a given recipe (either humanwritten or machine-generated). We would like a
task that allows the annotator to examine one step at
a time. However, it is tough to say whether a step
of a recipe is good or not given the open-ended,
subjective nature of cooking. 4 Therefore, from
the direct generation experiments, we learn that
providing more information to the model allows
for better quality generations. This motivates us
to instead include the original recipe in the prompt
and have a model revise it.
Generation + Identifying Operations We tried
to ask the model to additionally output the letter
of the step used (A-F); however, this was nearly
4This feedback was provided to us by researchers of our
lab group.
always A and thus not faithful. We leave this issue
to future work, noting that the letter could provide
a trace to the model’s reasoning and thus better
end-user interpretability.
Why Not Fine-Tune? While we considered finetuning, two reasons led to our decision to use
prompting instead. First, there is no gold training data for revising recipes (and collecting it was
prohibitively expensive and subjective). Second,
interfaces to LLMs such as ChatGPT and Bard
have been widely adopted by the public already.
Therefore, we also use off-the-shelf LLMs so our
findings can better align with how people actually
use them.
3 Human Evaluation
Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate
model performance, especially because we do not
have reference information for revised recipes. We
were also interested in measuring revisions that
may be challenging to detect automatically: the
addition of new information, the validity of new
information, and the perceived usefulness of new
recipes as a whole.
The most obvious human evaluation task would
be to display original recipes and machine-revised
recipes side-by-side and ask annotators to look for
deletions, insertions, and other errors; we were concerned that the long inputs would make this style
of task may be too strenuous for human annotators.
Therefore, we designed our human evaluation task
to decrease this strain. We opted to use Amazon
Mechanical Turk because it offers a flexible platform to design evaluation interfaces.5 Screenshots
of the interface are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
For each HIT, a annotator sees full set of ingredients and steps for a given recipe (Recipe A)—
original or revised—on the left and center of the
screen for a given dish. On the right, the other
recipe (Recipe B) is shown one step at a time. We
randomly flip if the original or revised recipe is
Recipe A.6 Annotators are asked if the current step
of Recipe B isincluded in Recipe A. If so, then they
proceed directly to the next step. If not, we ask if
the step is valid, i.e. they would reasonably expect
to perform this step while cooking the specified
5We will release our HTML template to help future researchers design more sophisticated human evaluation task
interfaces.
6This was done to help mitigate the confounding of the
order recipes are presented in and the comparison.

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: few-shot examples, we found that | the examples | Unnamed: 0 | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate
Row 1: few-shot examples, we found that: mostly affected the style of the output text while | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: model performance, especially because we do not
Row 2: few-shot examples, we found that: the content seemed to be roughly the same. | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: have reference information for revised recipes. We
Row 3: few-shot examples, we found that: We noticed that in all four configurations, the | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: were also interested in measuring revisions that
Row 4: few-shot examples, we found that: model struggled to account for modifications or | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: may be challenging to detect automatically: the
Row 5: few-shot examples, we found that: qualifications and tended towards a more generic | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: addition of new information, the validity of new
Row 6: few-shot examples, we found that: dish. For example, the generation for “mini apple | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: information, and the perceived usefulness of new
Row 7: few-shot examples, we found that: pies” says to only make 1 large pie. Furthermore, | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: recipes as a whole.
Row 8: few-shot examples, we found that: many recipes may sound reasonable but actually | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: The most obvious human evaluation task would
Row 9: few-shot examples, we found that: make a different dish. The generation for “paleo | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: be to display original recipes and machine-revised
Row 10: few-shot examples, we found that: paella,” for instance, says to use cauliflower florets | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: recipes side-by-side and ask annotators to look for
Row 11: few-shot examples, we found that: as a base, but paella is a rice dish, | the examples: so the paleo | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: deletions, insertions, and other errors; we were conRow 12: few-shot examples, we found that: variant should use riced cauliflower. | the examples: Such issues | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: cerned that the long inputs would make this style
Row 13: few-shot examples, we found that: are especially problematic as they require domain | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: of task may be too strenuous for human annotators.
Row 14: few-shot examples, we found that: knowledge which home cooks may lack, | the examples: which | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: Therefore, we designed our human evaluation task
Row 15: few-shot examples, we found that: would result them making dishes different from | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: to decrease this strain. We opted to use Amazon
Row 16: few-shot examples, we found that: their initial intent. | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: Mechanical Turk because it offers a flexible platRow 17: few-shot examples, we found that: A further complication when designing a human | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: form to design evaluation interfaces.5 Screenshots
Row 18: few-shot examples, we found that: evaluation task for a given recipe (either human- | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: of the interface are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Row 19: few-shot examples, we found that: written or machine-generated). We would like a | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: For each HIT, a annotator sees full set of ingreRow 20: few-shot examples, we found that: task that allows the annotator to examine one step at | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: dients and steps for a given recipe (Recipe A)—
Row 21: few-shot examples, we found that: a time. However, it is tough to say whether a step | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: original or revised—on the left and center of the
Row 22: few-shot examples, we found that: of a recipe is good or not given the open-ended, | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: screen for a given dish. On the right, the other
Row 23: few-shot examples, we found that: subjective nature of cooking.4 Therefore, | the examples: from | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: recipe (Recipe B) is shown one step at a time. We
Row 24: few-shot examples, we found that: the direct generation experiments, we learn that | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: randomly flip if the original or revised recipe is
Row 25: few-shot examples, we found that: providing more information to the model allows | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: Recipe A.6 Annotators are asked if the current step
Row 26: few-shot examples, we found that: for better quality generations. This motivates us | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: of Recipe B is included in Recipe A. If so, then they
Row 27: few-shot examples, we found that: to instead include the original recipe in the prompt | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: proceed directly to the next step. If not, we ask if
Row 28: few-shot examples, we found that: and have a model revise it. | the examples: | Unnamed: 0: | Our work relies on human judgment to evaluate: the step is valid, i.e. they would reasonably expect
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
Figure 2: The Opening Page for Our MTurk Task. When a annotator first accepts the HIT, they will see the dish name, ingredients list, and one full recipe (Recipe A). They will
answer questions about the second recipe (Recipe B) one step at a time. Detailed instructions and examples are available in prominently displayed collapsible banners above.

[PAGE 5]
Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of
Our MTurk Task. Annotators answer questions about
Recipe B one step at a time. If the current step is not
included in Recipe A, annotators are asked if it is a valid
step. This distinguishes detrimental hallucinations from
helpful elaborations. If the step is not valid, annotators
are asked to indicate why using the checkboxes, which
include a write-in “other” option annotators can also
choose to hide or show individual steps for convenience.
dish. If the step is furthermore not valid, we ask
why: the step contains invalid ingredient, invalid
action, or other (with a text input to explain why).
These follow-up questions appear dynamically as
well. When the annotator is finished with the current step, they hit the “Next” button to continue.
Each step includes a button to show or hide the
questions related to it for convenience.
When the annotator has reached the end of
Recipe B, they answer three more questions: 1)
their familiarity with the recipe so we can judge
how much to trust their answers; 2) any steps in
Recipe A that are missing in Recipe B; and 3) their
preference for Recipe A, B, or neither. We ask
annotators if a step from Recipe B is included in
Recipe A and if any steps from Recipe A are missing in Recipe B because we flip whether the original or revised recipe is static. We ask for their
overall preference as a higher-level judgment of
recipe quality.
4 Qualitative Analysis
Original Recipe
1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F .
2. Line baking sheets with parchment paper and set
aside.
3. In a medium bowl combine first 5 ingredients
(sugar - salt) and then add the apples and toss.
4. Unroll the pie crusts on a floured board and cut
3-inch rounds (note in description), re-roll scraps and
cut out more rounds (need an even number of rounds).
5. brush each round with beaten egg and then place a
large spoonful of apple mixture in center of half of the
rounds, top each with a plain round which you have cut
a vent in, sealing edges with a fork or your fingers (we
used fingers), sprinkle with sugar.
6. Bake pies on baking sheets for 20 minutes or until
golden.
Revised Recipe
1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F .
2. Line baking sheets with parchment paper and set
aside.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together sugar, flour, nutmeg, cinnamon, and salt.
4. Add the peeled and diced apples and toss to combine.
5. Unroll the pie crusts on a floured board and cut
3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds
until you have an even number of rounds.
6. Brush each round with beaten egg.
7. Place a large spoonful of the apple mixture in the
center of half of the rounds.
8. Top each filled round with a plain round and use a
fork or fingers to seal the edges.
9. Sprinkle with sugar.
10. Bake pies on baking sheets for 20 minutes or until
golden.
Figure 4: Comparison between Original and Revised
Recipes for “Mini Apple Pies”. We first use 10 colors
for the revised steps, then color semantically equivalent spans in the original recipe. Significant revisions
between the recipes are bolded, while phrases that are
deleted are italicized in the original.
4.1 Case Study: Mini Apple Pies
Figure 4 compares an original recipe and a revised
recipe for “Mini Apple Pies” 7. We observe that
the revisions are an overall improvement, and the
steps are easier to follow. The revised recipe keeps
the simple steps the same (1, 2, 6). As for minor
edits, it deletes some author digressions (“we used
fingers”), and makes a wording change (“need an
even” →“until you have and even”). It also generates a helpful elaboration that the apples should be
“peeled and diced.”8
7https://www.food.com/recipe/
mini-apple-pies-503243
8The set of ingredients for this recipe actually specifies
that the apples be peeled and diced; however, reiterating this

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds
Row 1: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: Our MTurk Task. Annotators answer questions about | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: until you have an even number of rounds.
Row 2: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: Recipe B one step at a time. If the current step is not | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: 6. Brush each round with beaten egg.
Row 3: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: 7. Place a large spoonful of the apple mixture in the
Row 4: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: included in Recipe A, annotators are asked if it is a valid | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds:
Row 5: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: center of half of the rounds.
Row 6: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: step. This distinguishes detrimental hallucinations from | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: 8. Top each filled round with a plain round and use a
Row 7: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: helpful elaborations. If the step is not valid, annotators | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: fork or fingers to seal the edges.
Row 8: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: are asked to indicate why using the checkboxes, which | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: 9. Sprinkle with sugar.
Row 9: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: include a write-in “other” option annotators can also | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: 10. Bake pies on baking sheets for 20 minutes or until
Row 10: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: golden.
Row 11: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: choose to hide or show individual steps for convenience. | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds:
Row 12: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: Figure 4: Comparison between Original and Revised
Row 13: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: Recipes for “Mini Apple Pies”. We first use 10 colors
Row 14: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: dish. If the step is furthermore not valid, we ask | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: for the revised steps, then color semantically equiva
Row 15: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: why: the step contains invalid ingredient, invalid | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: lent spans in the original recipe. Significant revisions
Row 16: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: action, or other (with a text input to explain why). | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: between the recipes are bolded, while phrases that are
Row 17: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: deleted are italicized in the original.
Row 18: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: These follow-up questions appear dynamically as | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds:
Row 19: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: well. When the annotator is finished with the cur- | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds:
Row 20: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: rent step, they hit the “Next” button to continue. | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: 4.1 Case Study: Mini Apple Pies
Row 21: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: Each step includes a button to show or hide the | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds:
Row 22: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: Figure 4 compares an original recipe and a revised
Row 23: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: questions related to it for convenience. | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds:
Row 24: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: recipe for “Mini Apple Pies”7. We observe that
Row 25: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: When the annotator has reached the end of | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: the revisions are an overall improvement, and the
Row 26: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: Recipe B, they answer three more questions: 1) | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: steps are easier to follow. The revised recipe keeps
Row 27: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: their familiarity with the recipe so we can judge | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: the simple steps the same (1, 2, 6). As for minor
Row 28: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: how much to trust their answers; 2) any steps in | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: edits, it deletes some author digressions (“we used
Row 29: Figure 3: A Closer Look at the Step-By-Step Portion of: Recipe A that are missing in Recipe B; and 3) their | 3-inch rounds. Re-roll scraps and cut out more rounds: fingers”), and makes a wording change (“need an
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
The model makes two major revisions. First,
it breaks the 5th original step, which is long and
complex, into 4 separate revised steps. Second, it
expands out the “the first 5 ingredients” from the
3rd original step into the 5 actual entities “sugar,
flour, nutmeg, cinnamon, and salt”. Both of these
revisions demonstrate exactly the desired behavior,
as end-users can more easily follow along, without
having to remember the long text or looking back
at the instructions (with flour-coated hands!). No
hallucinations have occurred in this case study.
5 Quantitative Analysis
We collected human evaluations for 8 recipes,9 and
got 3 annotations each (24 annotations total). The
median time is 22.8 minutes, with a standard deviation of 33.7 minutes.10 We believe that a few HITs
were left idle for an extended period of time, distorting the average time to completion and standard
deviation. This effect was also magnified by our
small sample size. There are 12 unique workers,
who completed an average of 2 annotations each.
We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human
evaluation, reporting a suite of results. The results
are at either the individual or aggregate levels. At
the individual level, each annotation is a data point;
this is applied to preferences and familiarity. At the
aggregate level, the answers from all the annotators
for that recipe go through a majority vote; this is
applied to the other results.
5.1 Aggregate-Level Analysis
Recall that the reference recipe (Recipe A) can be
either the ‘original’ or the ‘generation’ (i.e. the
step-by-step recipe is the opposite). We separately
analyze these conditions (4 recipes each) for selected results below.
Recipe Preferences We find across the 24 annotations, the generation is preferred 62.5% of the
time, the original 33.3%, and neither 4.2%. Interestingly, the propotions differ at the condition-level.
When Recipe A is the generation, there is an 83.3%
generation preference, whereas when Recipe A is
the original, there is a 58.3% original preference.
information can still help end-users.
9We actually collected 10 recipes, but there was an unfortunate corruption for results from 2 recipes.
10Based on pilot testing with our colleagues, we had estimated that each HIT would take 5 minutes to complete. We
paid annotators $1.20 per HIT (˜$15 per hour), and will increase
our rate in future annotation tasks to ensure fair compensation.
Future work should verify this bias towards preference Recipe A over more results.
Missing and Inclusion Steps First, we consider
the condition where Recipe A is the original. We
find that 86.0% of (37/43) steps from the generation
are included in Recipe B. Moreover, we find that
83.3% (5/6) of the added steps are deemed valid –
which shows that the LLM was helpful most of the
time. Annotators judged that 0% of steps from the
original were missing in the generation.
Considering the condition where Recipe A is the
generation, we find that 87.8% (43/49) steps from
the original are included in the generation. This is
similar to the other condition. However, we find
that only 33.3% (2/6) of the steps that were “added”
by the original are valid. This shows that the LLM’s
revision deleted several of the extraneous steps.11
Considering three-way Fleiss’s kappa for all 8
recipes, we find moderate agreement for included
steps (κ = 0 .66) and for valid steps ( κ = 0 .73).
This provides some empirical evidence that our
instructions are clear, and our decomposition of
the annotation work into several binary tasks is
effective.
5.2 Individual-Level Analysis
Familiarity At a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is very
unfamiliar with the recipe and 5 is very familiar
with the recipe, the mean familiarity score is 2.58
and the median is 2.5. This coincides with our
presumptions that revising recipes is hard since it
requires domain and cultural knowledge to understand some of the recipes.
We also conduct a Pearson Correlation test
(Freedman et al., 2007) between the levels of familiarity and the overall preference (i.e. original, LLM
revised, or neither). We code the preference with
numbers as follows: original (-1), neither (0), and
LLM revised (1). The r-statistic for the correlation
test is 0.0962 (p = 0.6547), showing that whether
or not someone is familiar with the recipe does not
have a correlation with the preferences.
Recipe Length We also conduct a Pearson Correlation test (Freedman et al., 2007) between the
length of the recipe, both “Recipe A” and “Recipe
B,” and the overall preference (i.e. original, LLM
revised, or neither). We coded the preferences the
same as in the case of familiarity. The r-statistic
11We also asked human annotators to classify why a step
is invalid, however, there was a bug that prevented it from
working.

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human | the annotation work into several binary | tasks | is
Row 1: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: evaluation, reporting a suite of results. The results | the annotation work into several binary: effective. | tasks: | is:
Row 2: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: are at either the individual or aggregate levels. At | the annotation work into several binary: | tasks: | is:
Row 3: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: | the annotation work into several binary: 5.2 Individual-Level Analysis | tasks: | is:
Row 4: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: the individual level, each annotation is a data point; | the annotation work into several binary: | tasks: | is:
Row 5: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: this is applied to preferences and familiarity. At the | the annotation work into several binary: Familiarity At a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is very | tasks: | is:
Row 6: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: aggregate level, the answers from all the annotators | the annotation work into several binary: unfamiliar with the recipe and 5 is very familiar | tasks: | is:
Row 7: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: for that recipe go through a majority vote; this is | the annotation work into several binary: with the recipe, the mean familiarity score is 2.58 | tasks: | is:
Row 8: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: applied to the other results. | the annotation work into several binary: and the median is 2.5. This coincides with our | tasks: | is:
Row 9: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: | the annotation work into several binary: presumptions that revising recipes is hard since it | tasks: | is:
Row 10: We conduct a quantitative analysis of the human: 5.1 Aggregate-Level Analysis | the annotation work into several binary: requires domain and cultural knowledge to under- | tasks: | is:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
for the correlation test is 0.0613 (p = 0.776) for
“Recipe A” and 0.1972 (p = 0.3556) for “Recipe B.”
This shows that the length of either recipe does not
correlate with the preference of the recipe.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
We have investigated the novel task of using LLMs
to revise food recipes and improve their usability and quality. This domain is of particular interest because recipes are complex, diverse, and
widely-used. Our work seeks to address how the
machine reasoning capabilities of LLMs can assist
real-world users. We first perform extensive experimentation with prompt engineering, and find the
most success with an informative prompt which is
grounded with the original recipe and ingredients
list. We then prompted GPT-3.4 with a diverse
sample of recipes. We perform both qualitative
and quantitative analysis to verify the system’s performance on our proposed task. Qualitatively, we
designed a comprehensive human evaluation task
which enables annotators to make granular comparisons between original and revised recipes. Highlights of our analyses include that annotators prefer
the revised recipe 62.5% of the time (vs. 33.3%
for original), and that 83.3% of revised steps are
deemed helpful.
This work was conducted for the final project of
CIS 7000-007 Machine Reasoning at the University of Pennsylvania, with the bulk of the time used
for designing, pilot testing, and implementing the
Amazon Mechanical Turk task. A direct extension
of our work would be expanding our analysis to
the full set of 300 diverse recipes. We also hope
to investigate automated methods to evaluate the
quality of revisions, and how well they correlate
with the human evaluations. Beyond this particular work, we encourage further efforts in human
evaluation design, model probing/interpretability,
and human-centered applications of large language
models.
References
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An
automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of
the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation
measures for machine translation and/or summarization, pages 65–72.
Yejin Bang, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Nayeon Lee, Wenliang Dai, Dan Su, Bryan Wilie, Holy Lovenia, Ziwei
Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, Quyet V . Do, Yan
Xu, and Pascale Fung. 2023. A multitask, multilingual, multimodal evaluation of chatgpt on reasoning,
hallucination, and interactivity.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 33:1877–1901.
David Freedman, Robert Pisani, and Roger Purves.
2007. Statistics (international student edition).
Pisani, R. Purves, 4th edn. WW Norton & Company,
New York.
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Javier Marin, Aritro Biswas, Ferda Ofli, Nicholas Hynes,
Amaia Salvador, Yusuf Aytar, Ingmar Weber, and
Antonio Torralba. 2019. Recipe1m+: A dataset for
learning cross-modal embeddings for cooking recipes
and food images. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell.
OpenAI. 2022. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models
for dialogue.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.02155.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and WeiJing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ajay Patel, Bryan Li, Mohammad Sadegh Rasooli,
Noah Constant, Colin Raffel, and Chris CallisonBurch. 2023. Bidirectional language models are also
few-shot learners.
Amaia Salvador, Nicholas Hynes, Yusuf Aytar, Javier
Marin, Ferda Ofli, Ingmar Weber, and Antonio Torralba. 2017. Learning cross-modal embeddings for
cooking recipes and food images. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur P Parikh.
2020. Bleurt: Learning robust metrics for text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04696.
Weizhe Yuan, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. 2021.
Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 34:27263–27277.

[PAGE 8]
Li Zhang, Qing Lyu, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2020.
Reasoning about goals, steps, and temporal ordering
with WikiHow. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 4630–4639, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Li Zhang, Hainiu Xu, Yue Yang, Shuyan Zhou, Weiqiu
You, Manni Arora, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2023.
Causal reasoning of entities and events in procedural
texts. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023, Dubrovnik, Croatia.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.09675.
Ben Zhou, Kyle Richardson, Qiang Ning, Tushar Khot,
Ashish Sabharwal, and Dan Roth. 2020. Temporal
reasoning on implicit events from distant supervision.
ArXiv, abs/2010.12753.
Shuyan Zhou, Li Zhang, Yue Yang, Qing Lyu,
Pengcheng Yin, Chris Callison-Burch, and Graham
Neubig. 2022. Show me more details: Discovering hierarchies of procedures from semi-structured
web data. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2998–3012, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.