[PAGE 1]
Large Language Models in Cryptocurrency
Securities Cases: Can a GPT Model Meaningfully
Assist Lawyers?
Arianna Trozze1,2*, Bennett Kleinberg 3† and Toby Davies 2,4†
1*Department of Computer Science, University College London, Gower
Street, London, WC1E 6EA, United Kingdom.
2Department of Security and Crime Science, University College London,
35 Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9EZ, United Kingdom.
3Department of Methodology & Statistics, Tilburg University,
Warandelaan 2, Tilburg, 5037 AB, Netherlands.
4School of Law, The Liberty Building, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2
9JT, United Kingdom.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): arianna.trozze@ucl.ac.uk;
Contributing authors: bennett.kleinberg@tilburguniversity.edu;
T.Davies@leeds.ac.uk;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) could be a useful tool for lawyers. However,
empirical research on their effectiveness in conducting legal tasks is scant. We
study securities cases involving cryptocurrencies as one of numerous contexts
where AI could support the legal process, studying GPT-3.5’s legal reasoning and
ChatGPT’s legal drafting capabilities. We examine whether a) GPT-3.5 can accurately determine which laws are potentially being violated from a fact pattern,
and b) whether there is a difference in juror decision-making based on complaints
written by a lawyer compared to ChatGPT. We feed fact patterns from real-life
cases to GPT-3.5 and evaluate its ability to determine correct potential violations
from the scenario and exclude spurious violations. Second, we had mock jurors
assess complaints written by ChatGPT and lawyers. GPT-3.5’s legal reasoning
skills proved weak, though we expect improvement in future models, particularly given the violations it suggested tended to be correct (it merely missed
additional, correct violations). ChatGPT performed better at legal drafting, and
arXiv:2308.06032v4 [cs.AI] 22 Feb 2024

[PAGE 2]
jurors’ decisions were not statistically significantly associated with the author of
the document upon which they based their decisions. Because GPT-3.5 cannot
satisfactorily conduct legal reasoning tasks, it would be unlikely to be able to
help lawyers in a meaningful way at this stage. However, ChatGPT’s drafting
skills (though, perhaps, still inferior to lawyers) could assist lawyers in providing
legal services. Our research is the first to systematically study an LLM’s legal
drafting and reasoning capabilities in litigation, as well as in securities law and
cryptocurrency-related misconduct.
Keywords: Cryptocurrency, securities law, artificial intelligence (AI), large language
models (LLMs), ChatGPT
1 Introduction
One of the most promising advances in the field of AI in recent months has been
improvements in Large Language Models (LLMs), and one potential application of
these is in conducting legal tasks. The public release of a user-friendly LLM in the
form of ChatGPT in November 2022 has amplified discussions surrounding such applications. Already, companies have sought to use AI-based tools to draft and file class
action or other lawsuits (Kahana, 2023). Similarly, attorneys have experimented with
using AI-based tools to automate some of their work (with mixed success, with one
attorney submitting a ChatGPT-generated brief citing fictitious cases (Martinson,
2023)). While the potential for using existing AI tools in the legal field has been documented (see, for example, (Perlman, 2022; Nay et al, 2023)), so far, empirical research
on its usefulness in practice is sparse. This study fills this gap by systematically testing
GPT-3.5’s legal reasoning and ChatGPT’s drafting capabilities.
The arguments about the potential of legal AI apply to various areas of law.
However, in this study, we focus on securities cases involving cryptocurrencies as an
example of the many possible contexts where AI might assist in the legal process. We
focus on this area as it is one where enforcement attorneys face significant resource
constraints that have been chronicled in both the academic and governmental literature (Kedia and Rajgopal, 2011; Bonsall et al, 2019; Holzman et al, 2023; U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2017; U.S. Department of Justice, 2022). This
suggests cases in this area could be well-served by AI-based assistance. In the absence
of government enforcement as a result of these resource limitations, some victims of
cryptocurrency securities violations have also sought justice through securities class
action cases;1 as of March 1, 2023, there had been 77 such cases filed (Stanford Law
School and Cornerstone Research, 2023).
Against this background, we seek to answer the following research questions:
1. Given a fact pattern from a securities case involving cryptocurrencies, can GPT-3.5
accurately discern which laws are potentially being violated?
1A class action case is a lawsuit brought by someone on behalf of a larger group of plaintiffs who have
suffered the same damage as the “lead plaintiff” who represents them and their interests.

[PAGE 3]
2. Is there a difference in juror decision-making between complaints written by a
lawyer and those written by ChatGPT in the context of cryptocurrency securities
class action lawsuits?
We conduct our research using the popular, publicly available LLM from OpenAI,
GPT-3.5, as an operalization of an LLM, evaluating its ability to identify laws potentially being violated from fact patterns in real-life cases (while not alleging erroneous
violations). For our second research question, we had mock jurors assess pleadings
written by ChatGPT (the May 27, 2023 version, based on GPT-3.5 and further-fined
tuned using human feedback) and lawyers. The current study is the first to evaluate an LLM’s legal drafting capabilities in a systematic way and to explore its legal
reasoning skills in litigation (and, more specifically, the first to test it in the areas
of securities law or wrongdoing involving cryptocurrencies). We evaluate these LLMs’
capabilities in two basic parts of the legal process—legal drafting (specifically the first
document filed in a case) and legal reasoning in a litigation context—to gain insight
into whether LLMs have any potential to meaningfully assist human lawyers. Lawyers
spend up to 60% of their time on legal drafting and legal reasoning and drafting are
inextricably linked (Litera, 2024; Gale, 1979). This suggests that LLMs assisting with
these tasks would be particularly useful to lawyers. Furthermore, if the LLMs cannot
handle these fundamental tasks, they are unlikely to be able to conduct any of the
more advanced tasks required of lawyers.
1.1 Large language models and their use in legal contexts
1.1.1 Introduction to LLMs
LLMs are advanced AI systems that process human language (referred to as “natural language” in this context). This means they can generate and respond to human
text, with recent systems appearing to be capable of doing this in a manner that is
near-imperceptibly distinct from humans. The state of the art employs a deep learning
technique called the Transformer architecture to accomplish this (Topal et al, 2021).
LLMs have advanced rapidly in recent months, most prominently with OpenAI’s
release of GPT-3 in November 2022 (Choi et al, 2023). GPT stands for “Generative
Pre-trained Transformer”, and was first introduced by Brown et al (2020). What differentiates LLMs from other natural language processing (NLP) models is the massive
amount of data on which they are pre-trained to conduct these tasks and the complexity of this Transformer architecture; GPT-3, for example, has 175 billion parameters
(Choi et al, 2023). LLMs’ colossal amount of training data (though it should be noted
that OpenAI’s training data is proprietary) means they perform well at natural language tasks in a variety of contexts, whether or not they have been trained on a
particular task specifically. For a more detailed introduction to LLMs see (Zhao et al,
2023) and (Hadi et al, 2023).
1.1.2 OpenAI’s LLMs
Alongside GPT-3, OpenAI also released a user-friendly public interface based on the
model, called ChatGPT, which was further fine-tuned using Reinforcement Learning

[PAGE 4]
with Human Feedback (Choi et al, 2023). This gave users the opportunity to experiment with an LLM in various contexts, without the technical expertise previously
required. Since November 2022, OpenAI has released several variations of the GPT3 model, as well as of the subsequent iterations, GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. In addition
to interacting with the latest fine-tuned version of GPT- n through the user interface, more tech-savvy users can access specific models using OpenAI’s API. These
vary by the period over which training data was collected, the amount of input and
output they can handle, and some are optimized for more specific tasks like writing computer code. Full details of the current, most recent releases can be found
here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/models. In this study, we use GPT-3.5 models available publicly at the time of data collection, namely,gpt-3.5-turbo-0301 (the
basis of ChatGPT at the time) and text-davinci-003.
1.1.3 Using OpenAI’s LLMs
To use any of OpenAI’s LLMs, the user must provide what is called a “prompt”
from which the model will generate natural language. An example of such a prompt
could be “Please identify five plants native to New Mexico.” The nature of LLMs and
their proprietary training data means it is far from clear which prompts will be most
effective in accomplishing a given task or producing a desired output; the range of
possible prompts is as broad as language itself, and there is no established formula for
composing them. The process of developing a suitable prompt for an LLM is referred
to as “prompt engineering”.
Developers have the option of fine-tuning the model by training it on additional
data relevant for a specific, desired task. Not doing this is referred to as “zero-shot”
learning, i.e., using the model as pre-trained (Allingham et al, 2023). “Few-shot”
learning refers to providing the model with some examples in the prompt (OpenAI,
2023b). In the example provided above, a few-shot prompt could be: 2
Task instructions:
1. Flora native to California (provided): [California native plant 1], [California native
plant 2], [California native plant 3]
2. Flora native to Texas (provided): [Texas native plant 1], [Texas native plant 2]
New task: New Mexico native flora
Please use your knowledge of native plants of California and Texas to provide five distinct
native plant species in New Mexico.
Desired New Mexico plant species (to be filled in by model): [Plant name], [Plant name],
[Plant name], [Plant name], [Plant name]
When using OpenAI’s models through their API, users have several additional parameters they can specify. All of these settings can be found at https:
//platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference, however, we highlight two. The first is the
2We asked ChatGPT to generate a few-shot prompt for this task, which we adapted and present here.

[PAGE 5]
temperature, which determines how random (as opposed to deterministic) the output of the model is. Possible temperature values range from 0 to 2, with higher values
adding more randomness to the outputs. Users must also set the maximum number of
“tokens”—a term used in natural language processing (NLP) to refer to elements of
text (e.g., words or characters)—they will allow the model to use in its output. OpenAI charges users of its API based on the amount of tokens used in the input and
output of a prompt, with different models allowing different volumes of tokens to be
used (OpenAI, 2023a).
1.2 LLMs’ use in legal tasks
Given GPT-3’s fairly recent release, there is limited empirical research on its use in
the legal context, and that which does exist is generally not yet peer-reviewed. Prior
research has explored comparatively simpler NLP models’ usefulness in law, exploring
tasks like judgment extraction or indexing large bodies of case law (Yu et al, 2022).
Given the magnitude of recent advancements in this field, however, we review here
only research involving GPT-3 or higher.
1.2.1 Legal tasks
Existing research in the field of legal applications of LLMs does not necessarily focus
on litigation (let alone government enforcement), but rather LLMs’ general knowledge
of the law and their ability to apply it. Where tasks related to litigation are included
(for example, in (Iu and Wong, 2023)), the focus has been more general, rather than
applied to a particular aspect of U.S. civil or criminal procedure. Most commonly,
research in this field has involved testing LLMs’ performance on legal exams, for
example, in taking a bar or law school exam. Bommarito II and Katz (2022) had
GPT-3.5 take the multi-state multiple choice U.S. bar exam, on which it earned a
40.3% score, compared with a 25% baseline score for guessing. Yu et al (2022) asked
GPT-3 to conduct legal reasoning tasks that are part of the Japanese Bar exam. They
wrote prompts corresponding to existing legal reasoning techniques for a task that
requires the lawyer to determine whether a hypothesis is true or false based on a given
premise. Finally, Choi et al (2023) asked ChatGPT to complete various law school
exams involving both essay and multiple choice questions; it earned a C+ score.
Similarly to our research, Nay et al (2023) and Blair-Stanek et al (2023) gave versions of the text-davinci-003 model legal reasoning tasks outside of an examination
setting, asking it to apply statutes to answer questions and evaluating its performance
systematically. Nay et al (2023) used multiple choice questions for this task. BlairStanek et al (2023) used the StAtutory Reasoning Assessment (SARA) data set for
their task, finding that GPT-3 performed significantly better than BERT 3, but “performed at chance (0.5) or worse in the zero-shot tests where there was no statute
included.” They noted that, in particular, GPT-3 displayed incorrect knowledge of U.S.
tax code. When given synthetic statutes, GPT-3 performed even worse, which they
claim raises “doubts about GPT-3’s ability to handle basic legal work” (Blair-Stanek
et al, 2023).
3BERT is a less advanced LLM. For a full introduction to BERT, see (Koroteev, 2021).

[PAGE 6]
Savelka (2023) employed GPT-3.5 in a task involving the semantic annotation of
legal documents. They found that it performed well—and, in fact, better than finetuned versions of BERT and a Random Forest Model—with scores of F 1 = 0 .73 in
identifying key topics in court opinions, F 1 = 0 .86 for the same in contracts, and
F 1 = 0.54 in statutes and regulations.
Iu and Wong (2023) and Perlman (2022) conducted preliminary exploration of
ChatGPT’s general drafting and legal analytical capabilities. For example, Iu and
Wong (2023) asked ChatGPT to prepare cross-examination questions for a case and
draft a skeleton argument based on analysis of a complex fact pattern, among other
tasks. They did not prompt the model or evaluate their results in a systematic way.
They did, however, suggest ChatGPT performed well at this task, though not as well
as a lawyer. These authors also used ChatGPT to assist them in drafting their papers.
1.2.2 Models
In terms of the particular LLMs tested, three studies (Bommarito II and Katz, 2022;
Savelka, 2023; Blair-Stanek et al, 2023) usedtext-davinci-003, as we do in answering
our first research question. Nay et al (2023) used various models, noting that GPT-4
(the state of the art at the time) performed best and that they actually used GPT-4
to help grade their answers. Yu et al (2022) used GPT-3.
1.2.3 Areas of law
The most common area of law on which prior research focused is tax law. Nay et al
(2023), Blair-Stanek et al (2023), and Choi et al (2023) all included tax law in their
studies. Bommarito II and Katz (2022) note that GPT-3.5 passed the evidence and
torts section of the bar exam, and Choi et al (2023) also included an examination
paper on torts in their work. In addition to these two subjects, Choi et al (2023)
also examined ChatGPT on constitutional law, federalism and separation of powers,
and employee benefits. Savelka (2023) researched GPT-3.5’s capabilities in relation to
veterans’ affairs cases, public health cases, and general commercial legal contracts.
1.2.4 Prompt engineering and parameter selection
Much previous research (though we note most had not been released at the time of our
study design) focused on prompt engineering in legal contexts. Yu et al (2022) found
that using the legal reasoning technique “Issue, Rule, Application, and Conclusion”
(IRAC) in their prompts performed best. Some research (Bommarito II and Katz,
2022; Savelka, 2023) found that zero-shot prompting proved more effective compared
to fine-tuned models, and Choi et al (2023) determined that, generally, the simplest
prompts performed best.
However, this is contradictory to other findings, such as those of Nay et al (2023)
and Blair-Stanek et al (2023), which used zero-shot performance as a baseline. Nay et al
(2023) also explored chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting and few-shot prompting, and
combined these approaches. CoT prompting involves asking an LLM to “think stepby-step”, which Kojima et al (2023) previously found to improve performance (though
not specifically in legal tasks). Nay et al (2023) found that CoT only improved the

[PAGE 7]
results for GPT-4 and that providing relevant legal texts in the prompts moderately
improved the results. Few-shot prompting led to better results for GPT-4 but not for
other models.
Blair-Stanek et al (2023) used up to 10-shot CoT prompting and also found, again
contrary to Kojima et al (2023)’s results, this was unhelpful in their experimental
context. In general, their prompts were much more complex: for example, in their “4shot dynamic prompting” context, they included the four most similar training cases
and labelled the text of the case (which they also provided in full) with the “premise”,
the “hypothesis”, and the “answer”. Having to prepare prompts in this way may not
actually save lawyers time. Notably, Choi et al (2023) specifically asked ChatGPT
not to “fabricate” any facts, and it followed this instruction. Overall, these findings
suggest prompt engineering is much more of an art than an exact science.
Perlman’s (2022) was the only study to ask ChatGPT to draft a complaint, which,
unsurprisingly, resulted in a very short complaint being drafted. We note that neither
they, nor Iu and Wong (2023), engaged in any documented attempts to refine their
prompts. Perlman (2022) used the following prompt:
“Draft a legal complaint for a Massachusetts state court by John Doe against Jane Smith
for injuries arising out of a car accident on January 1, 2022 caused by Jane Smith at the
intersection of Tremont Street and Park Street in Boston. The complaint should specify
that Jane Smith failed to stop at a red light and caused John Smith serious injuries.”
For drafting essays, Choi et al (2023) asked ChatGPT to write essays section by
section; we use a similar prompting approach in this study.
1.2.5 Consideration of LLMs’ training data
Since LLMs have been trained on large corpora of real-world text data, it is possible
that some legal sources are present in the training data and therefore have previously
been “seen” by the models, which the literature considers at length. 4 As noted in
some studies (Bommarito II and Katz, 2022; Nay et al, 2023; Blair-Stanek et al, 2023),
this represents a potential threat to the validity of research of this nature since a
model may successfully complete a task simply by reproducing known material, rather
than by “interpreting” its meaning. Bommarito II and Katz (2022) identified behavior
which appeared to indicate that there were some legal sources in its training. In their
research, Nay et al (2023) and Blair-Stanek et al (2023) specifically used synthetic
cases to ensure the LLM had not been been trained on them. Notably, Blair-Stanek
et al (2023) found that GPT-3 was unlikely to have been trained on the complete
U.S. tax code because it showed incorrect knowledge thereof. They note that, “given
a U.S. Code citation, GPT-3 can recite plausible but incorrect statutory language”
(Blair-Stanek et al, 2023).
1.3 Cryptocurrency securities violations and related law
As discussed above, the use of LLMs might be particularly useful to lawyers in the
cryptocurrency securities context due to documented resource limitations faced by
4Since the training data for most LLMs, including ChatGPT, is proprietary, this cannot be confirmed
directly.

[PAGE 8]
enforcement attorneys in this area of law. We use examples from this domain to
perform our study. In this section, we provide a brief outline of the legal context for
cryptocurrency securities violations.
1.3.1 U.S. securities laws and securities class action lawsuits
A security is “an investment of money in a commercial, financial, or other business
enterprise, with the expectation of profit or other gain produced by the efforts of
others” (Ninth Circuit Jury Instructions Committee, 2023). Specific types of securities include stocks, bonds, and investment contracts (Ninth Circuit Jury Instructions
Committee, 2023). In the U.S., at the federal level, the offer, sale, and purchase of
securities is governed by the following laws: Securities Act of 1933 (“Securities Act”);
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (“Exchange Act”); Investment Company Act of 1940;
Investment Advisers Act of 1940; Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”);
and Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (“Dodd
Frank”) (Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023). The U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA) are responsible for civil securities law enforcement in the U.S.
In addition to violations of the aforementioned regulations, the SEC has the power
to charge “securities fraud based on negligent conduct” and “aiding and abetting
securities fraud” (Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023).
Private securities cases usually take the form of class actions. Private plaintiffs
enjoy rights of action under the Securities Act, the Exchange Act, and Sarbanes-Oxley.
The most common bases for such suits when they involve cryptocurrencies are are
Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act and SEC Rule 10b-5 (securities fraud) and Sections
5(a), 5(c), and 12(a)(1) of the Securities Act (unregistered securities offering, and
liability of the offerer or seller thereof) (Practical Law Securities Litigation & White
Collar Crime, 2023; noa, n.d.a,n). For a full overview of U.S. civil procedure and the
procedure for class action suits as set out in the PSLRA, see Appendix A.
1.3.2 Introduction to cryptocurrencies
Cryptocurrencies are a store of value initially conceived in 2008 by a developer (or
group) using the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto (Home Office, 2023; Nakamoto, 2008).
Nakamoto proposed the first cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, as a peer-to-peer “digital representation of value” which would enable direct transactions between individuals without
the need for an intermediary financial institution (Home Office, 2023). Bitcoin uses
a novel combination of existing cryptographic 5 concepts called a blockchain, which
serves as a decentralized ledger of all transactions (Narayanan, 2018; Moffett, 2022).
Transactions are secured through cryptography, with participants verifying transactions by solving computationally complex cryptographic problems in a process called
“mining”. As part of this mining process, valid transactions are combined into “blocks”
which are added to the blockchain. They are “chained” to previous blocks in a way
5Cryptography refers to the science of secure communications, namely ways to ensure communications
remain confidential, authentic, tamper-resistant, and only comprehensible by intended participants. It is
used for securing various types of information and permeates several facets of everyday life, from sending
encrypted text messages to online banking.

[PAGE 9]
that can be cryptographically verified, meaning that nefarious actors cannot alter this
digital ledger, thereby ensuring the system’s security (Nakamoto, 2008). For a more
complete introduction to Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies, see (Narayanan et al, 2016).
1.3.3 Cryptocurrencies as securities
Since Bitcoin was first made available in 2009, the cryptocurrency ecosystem has
greatly expanded, with more than 26,000 cryptocurrencies in existence today (CoinMarketCap, 2023). These may exist on their own blockchains (or other forms of
decentralized ledger technology) or can be created on existing blockchains, such as the
Ethereum blockchain. In the U.S., both the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC) and the SEC have claimed to have regulatory control over cryptocurrencies in
certain situations. In many cases, certain cryptocurrencies’ primary purpose has been
determined to be as an investment contract, thereby classifying them as securities
(Moffett, 2022). As discussed above, the SEC is responsible for securities regulation
and enforcement. Though a full discussion of the SEC’s reasons for considering certain cryptocurrencies as securities is outside of the scope of this paper, we give a brief
overview. For a full consideration thereof, see (Moffett, 2022).
The SEC and the U.S. federal courts have traditionally based their analysis as
to whether a cryptocurrency constitutes a security on SEC v. W.J. Howey Co. (now
colloquially referred to as the “Howey test”). In this Supreme Court case, an investment contract needed to meet the following criteria: it had to be “(1) an investment
of money, (2) in a common enterprise, (3) with the expectation of profits, (4) to be
derived from the entrepreneurial or managerial efforts of others” (Moffett, 2022).
Based on the Howey test, Bitcoin is not a security (specifically because it does not
satisfy requirements two and four discussed above), but one could argue that many
other cryptocurrencies (such as those featured in the cases we explore below) are.
Notably, it is possible that a cryptocurrency’s status as a security can change over
time (Moffett, 2022).
2 Methods
This study seeks to discover whether (1) when presented with a fact pattern from a
securities enforcement case involving cryptocurrencies, GPT-3.5 can determine which
laws are potentially being violated, and (2) whether, for securities class action lawsuits
involving cryptocurrencies, there is a difference in juror decision-making based on
complaints written by a lawyer compared with those written by ChatGPT.
We used versions of OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 models to answer both questions. For the
first, we prompted GPT-3.5 to discern which laws were potentially being violated,
when presented with fact patterns from real-life cases. We then calculated various
evaluation metrics to test its performance, using the allegations in the cases from which
we extracted the fact patterns as our “ground truth” for correctly identified violations.
The closer GPT-3.5 got to identifying all of the counts in the actual complaint (and
without alleging erroneous charges), the better we considered its performance at this
task.

[PAGE 10]
To answer our second research question, we presented mock jurors with pleading
documents written by either ChatGPT or a human lawyer and asked them to answer
various questions. The performance of ChatGPT in legal drafting was considered to
be adequate if jurors reached the same decisions when presented with the AI-drafted
complaint as they did for that written by a human lawyer. Ordinarily, jurors would not
evaluate complaints, but rather would make a decision based on lawyers’ arguments
and evidence presented (mostly verbally) at trial. However, in this study, we asked
jurors to evaluate the complaint directly, assuming the facts presented therein are true.
In legal procedure, complaints would typically be read and evaluated by judges and
lawyers, and so, it would be useful for lawyers to review such complaints that were
generated; however, in this study, we did not have access to a sufficient number of
lawyers to produce a robust evaluation of ChatGPT’s legal drafting skills. Ultimately,
we opted to provide detailed jury instructions to a larger number of laypeople to make
decisions based on a legal document.
In our study, we used zero-shot transfer. 6 In developing prompts to explore each
research question, we tested them on a general securities enforcement case, SEC v.
Kaplan, et al. , case number 2:23-cv-01648, in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern
District of New York.
2.1 GPT-3.5’s ability to discern violations of U.S. law
We examined GPT-3.5’s ability to determine, when given a fact pattern corresponding
to a case, and prompted with a particular legal reasoning technique, which U.S. laws
were potentially being violated. Civil complaints contain a section detailing the facts
of the case and describing the defendants’ alleged conduct. For each case we study,
we provided the information (verbatim) in the factual allegations section to GPT-3.5.
For a more detailed introduction to legal complaints, see Appendix A.
2.1.1 Choice of model
To answer this research question, we used the GPT-3.5 text-davinci-003 model,
which is trained on data collected prior to June 2021. Aside from newer models being
more expensive to run, their training data sets are more recent. For this research
question, we wanted to ensure that the model had no prior knowledge of our cases
(i.e., that these cases could not be present in its training data). We used OpenAI’s
native Python wrapper to execute our API calls.
2.1.2 Case selection
In selecting our cases, we first identified all cryptocurrency securities class action
and SEC enforcement cases which were filed after June 2021 (and before our data
collection date, on March 24, 2023). We included all SEC cases under the heading
“Crypto Assets” on the SEC’s Crypto Assets and Cyber Enforcement Actions page
6Zero-shot transfer means that the LLM has neither been given relevant examples in the prompt, nor
further fine-tuned (i.e., trained on many examples to produce a model which will accept either zero-shot
or multi-shot prompts). However, because large-scale pre-trained models could happen to incorporate some
relevant examples in their training data, this is distinct from zero-shot learning (Allingham et al, 2023).

[PAGE 11]
(U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2023). This list includes all SEC enforcement actions that involve cryptocurrencies. For the class action cases, we collected all
cases included in the Stanford Securities Class Action Clearinghouse Filings Database
listed under “Cryptocurrency Litigation” in their “Current Trends” section (Stanford Law School and Cornerstone Research, 2023). Again, these are securities class
action cases that involve cryptocurrencies. This gave us an initial set of 34 class action
cases and 43 enforcement actions. Next, we extracted the factual allegations sections
of the cases’ respective complaints. Because the maximum number of tokens for the
text-davinci-003 model is 4,097, we excluded all cases whose facts sections exceeded
this number of tokens (using OpenAI’s Tokenizer tool to calculate the number of
tokens) (OpenAI, 2023c). This resulted in the exclusion of 50 cases. We also excluded
any administrative SEC cases ( n = 9).
There were two pairs of cases which were filed separately, but with nearly identical
facts sections, due to lawyers having chosen not to join the defendants. For each of
the two pairs, we chose to include whichever case had a more detailed facts section in
our final data set and excluded the other.
This left us with a final set of 20 cases, eight of which are class action cases. More
details of our case selection process, including reasons for excluding specific cases, can
be found in Appendix C.1.
2.1.3 Prompt design
To craft our prompt for this aspect of our study, we used ChatGPT’s online user
interface. Our full prompt design process—tested on our sample case, SEC v. Kaplan,
et al.—is detailed in Appendix B.1, though we highlight selected considerations here.
Following Yu et al’s (2022) research, we requested ChatGPT use a specific legal reasoning technique (IRAC). Second, as we conducted our prompt engineering, it was
clear we needed to be as specific as possible in our prompt. Our final prompt, therefore, defined the jurisdiction in which the facts occurred or were connected (based on
where the real complaint was filed; this also communicates to the LLM that we are
interested in U.S. law for this task), indicated that the violations should be federal
and civil (as opposed to state or criminal laws), and that the LLM should state the
specific section of any statute potentially violated.
We arrived at the following, final prompt:
“The following text is from the \“factual allegations\” section of a complaint filed in the
[jurisdiction; in the sample case, Eastern District of New York ]. Based on the facts in this
text, please identify which federal civil law(s) and section thereof the defendant(s) violated.
Please use the following method of legal reasoning to come up with the allegations: Issue,
Rule (including the specific statute and section thereof), Application, Conclusion: [ text
from factual allegations section ]”
2.1.4 Input pre-processing and cleaning
Before running our prompt on our chosen cases, we pre-processed and cleaned our
input text. We manually removed the following from the complaint text: paragraph
numbers; footnotes; references; pictures; indications that emphasis was added; background information (for example, an introduction to cryptocurrency); and extra

[PAGE 12]
spaces. We also added the appropriate escape character (“ \”) before quotation marks
and apostrophes.
2.1.5 Parameters and execution
Before applying our prompt to our final set of cases, we considered the appropriate
temperature setting for our model. Ultimately, we wanted the model to follow our
instructions closely, so we chose 0.2 as our temperature. 7 We also experimented with
a temperature of 1 (for a more random output), however, we found that this resulted
in little change in the output. We used the same temperature of 0.2 as we sought to
identify the baseline performance of ChatGPT for a task of this kind (rather than
exploring how we can fine-tune its parameters for better performance). For each case,
we ran the model five times (each with the same temperature of 0.2).
The max tokens parameter specifies the maximum length of text to be generated:
we set this to the total number of tokens this model accepts (4,097) minus the number
of tokens provided in the prompt for each case, thereby allowing the maximum possible
size for each output. We also recorded the number of tokens used for completion in
each output for each of our cases; this can be found in Appendix D.
2.1.6 Evaluation
To evaluate GPT-3.5’s performance, we measured the extent to which the violations
it identified matched those in real cases. For this purpose, we used the allegations in
the real-life complaint as our “ground truth”. For each case, multiple violations apply
in the real case, and GPT-3.5 can also identify multiple violations, but the number of
violations may not be equal. Therefore, we employed performance metrics to measure
the extent to which GPT-3.5 identified the correct violations or identified incorrect
ones. We note that there is some limitation to automatically considering any additional
charges suggested by GPT-3.5 as “incorrect”, as lawyers sometimes make mistakes
or decide not to include certain charges for other, strategic reasons. However, for the
purposes of this study, we consider the lawyers’ charges as “correct” based on the facts
in question.
With that in mind, we adapted the definitions of true positives, false positives,
and false negatives for our context to calculate performance metrics. In this case, the
number of true positives (TP) was the number of claims GPT-3.5 correctly identified.
The number of false positives (FP) was the number of incorrect, additional violations
suggested. The number of violations GPT-3.5 missed constituted the false negatives
(FN). The number of true negatives was not applicable in our analysis because it would
not be meaningful to count every possible law that does not apply in this context.
We use adapted definitions because we allow for partial counts of these scores to
capture the nuance of the legal context. To be considered “correct”, GPT-3.5 needed
to identify all elements of each legal claim. Otherwise, it would receive a partial score,
as per the following rules:
7We chose 0.2 instead of 0 because, while we wanted a highly deterministic output, we wanted some
randomness to allow for some variability in our output. During our prompt engineering process, when we
set the temperature to 0, each iteration yielded the exact same output.

[PAGE 13]
• Rule 1: In cases where violations are almost always alleged together (for example,
Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act and Rule 10b-5 thereunder), we counted this
as a single violation and scored accordingly. However, GPT-3.5 only identified, for
example, a Rule 10b-5 violation, but not a violation of Section 10(b), we would score
this as 0.5. 8
• Rule 2: We also awarded 0.5 points if the output included the correct law, but failed
to include the specific section the defendants violated. So, for example, if the output
suggested violations of the Securities Act, but did not specify that the allegations
were of Sections 5(a) and 5(c) thereof, 0.5 points would be awarded. However, if
the output merely stated that violations of “federal securities laws” occurred, it was
given a score of 0.
• Rule 3: In cases where the complaint charged Sections 5(a) and 5(c) of the Securities
Act and the output only included Section 5 thereof (overall), we considered this as
a true positive (because Section 5 overall would include Sections 5(a) and 5(c)).
• Rule 4: For the purpose of calculating true positives and false negatives, where the
complaint charged different counts of the exact same allegations in the complaint
(usually just for different defendants), we counted them as a single violation. That
being said, there was one case ( Securities and Exchange Commission v. Arbitrade
Ltd., et al., 1:22-cv-23171, S.D. Fla.), where one claim was for Rule 10b-5 under the
Exchange Act and another for 10b-5(c) (against a different defendant). However,
since one of the charges did include all of Rule 10b-5, we counted these both as a
single violation.
• Rule 5: We did not infer any charges if the output failed to reference the appropriate
statute (i.e., if it included only “unregistered securities”, we did not assume it meant
a violation of Section 5 or Section 12(a)(1) of the Securities Act).
• Rule 6: Finally, the prompt specifically requested violations of federal laws. Some
outputs included state law violations. Because this was contrary to the prompt’s
instructions, these were automatically considered as false positives for the sake of
scoring.
Figure 1 depicts our scoring process for the output for one run of our test case.
After applying these rules manually to the output, we evaluate GPT-3.5’s performance at this legal reasoning task. We used our previously defined, adapted concepts
of true positives, false positives, and false negatives to calculate precision and recall
(similarly to how Ting (2010) applied such metrics to a document retrieval system, as
we were, essentially, asking GPT-3.5 to retrieve relevant laws from a finite set of laws).
Precision (P ) is the total number of correct charges identified (true positives), divided
by the total number of charges GPT-3.5 identified (true positives plus false positives):
8There is some further nuance to this in our sample case (see Figure 1) because we do not specify in
our prompt whether the case in question would be a government enforcement or private matter and there
is no private right to action under Section 10(b) unless the company is publicly listed. However, while
some courts have ruled there is a private right of action under Section 17(a), the generally accepted view
is that this is not the case (and, besides, GPT-3.5 did not specify any part of Section 17 in its output for
our sample case) (Legal Information Institute, n.d.a). This implies that GPT-3.5 either a) assumed this
would be a government enforcement case and, therefore, charging only 10b-5 without 10(b) is unusual, or
b) it assumed this was a private case and the Section 17 finding was wrong. Our scoring system, therefore,
better captures these nuances. While it is, of course, not infallible and still assumes the charges in the real
complaint are the ground truth, it would be impractical to have several lawyers analyze each output from
GPT-3.5 to assign it a score.

[PAGE 14]
Allegations in original complaint
Count 1: Section 10(b) and Rule
10b-5 thereunder of the Exchange
Act
Count 2: Sections 206(1) and
206(2) of the Investment Advisers
Act
GPT-3.5 output for a single run
of test case
"The defendants violated federal
civil laws by engaging in fraudulent
activities against their clients while
working as investment adviser
representatives. Specifically, the
defendants violated the Securities
Act of 1933 (Section 17), the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
(Section 10b-5), and the
investment Advisers Act of 1940
(Sections 206(1) and 206(2))."
GPT-3.5-identified counts
Count 1: Securities Act of 1933,
Section 17
Count 2: The Securities Exchange
Act of 1934 (Rule 10b-5)
Count 3: Investment Advisers Act
of 1940 (Sections 206(1) and
206(2))
True positives: 1.5
Description: Correctly identified
count 2 in the original complaint,
the Investment Advisers Act of
1940 (Sections 206(1) and 206(2))
Score: 1
Scoring rule applied: Rule 1, see
Appendix D
Description: Correctly identified
part of Count 1 in original
complaint, Rule 10b-5 of the
Exchange Act, but failed to include
Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act
Score: 0.5
Scoring rule applied: Rule 1, see
Appendix D
False positives: 1
Description: Alleged violations of
Section 17 of the securities act,
which was not included in the
original complaint
Score: 1
False negatives: 0.5
Description: Failed to include
Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act
Score: 0.5
Scoring rule applied: Rule 1, see
appendix D
P: 60%
R: 75%
Final score: 66.67%
Fig. 1 Scoring GPT-3.5 output for one run of test case
P = TP
TP + FP
Recall (R) is total number of correct charges identified (true positives) divided by
the total number of possible correct charges (true positives plus the false negatives).
R = TP
TP + FN
We then use the output of these measures to calculate an F -1 score that balances
the precision and recall based on our adapted versions of TP, FP, and FN, as our final
score, calculated as follows:
F -1 = 2 · P · R
P + R
We calculate the average scores for each metric across the five outputs for each of
our 20 cases, as well as for all of our outputs ( n = 100).
The full outputs of the prompts for each of our cases, as well as our calculated
scores, are in Appendix D.

[PAGE 15]
2.2 Differences in juror decision-making based on human vs.
AI-written legal complaints
To answer our second research question, we sought to abstract the legal process to
discern whether jurors made different decisions when presented with legal allegations
and factual scenarios written by ChatGPT versus those written by human lawyers.
We explored this using real-world securities class action cases.
2.2.1 Case selection
In order to more fulsomely evaluate ChatGPT’s legal drafting skills, we included cases
of varying quality. We wanted to evaluate ChatGPT’s drafting ability not only for
high quality cases (i.e., those a judge decided had merit to continue through the legal
process), but also those of lower quality (i.e., that a judge dismissed). We used class
action cases because, overwhelmingly, cases brought by the SEC are successful: in
2022, for example, it won 12 of its 15 trials (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission,
2022). The sample of such cases that are “without merit” is, therefore, extremely
small, potentially limiting the insight that could be gained.
To select our cases, we first identified all cryptocurrency class action cases, again,
using the Stanford Securities Class Action Clearinghouse Filings Database, specifically
collecting cases listed under “Cryptocurrency Litigation” in their “Current Trends”
section (Stanford Law School and Cornerstone Research, 2023). Initially, we examined
cases which had been filed between ChatGPT’s June 2021 training cut-off date and
the date of our research (March 24, 2023). This gave us 34 cases. We sought cases
which met the following criteria:
1. For “valid” cases, the class action cases had to have had a motion to dismiss filed,
considered, and, ultimately, denied by the judge.
2. For our “meritless” cases, the class action cases had to have a motion to dismiss
filed, considered, and, ultimately, ordered affirmatively by the judge.
From our initial set of cases, only one case from each category met these criteria, which would not allow us to evaluate ChatGPT’s pleading drafting abilities in a
particularly robust way. Therefore, we expanded the temporal range of our search to
include all cryptocurrency securities class action cases, the first of which was filed in
2016 (Stanford Law School and Cornerstone Research, 2023). This increased the total
number of cases to evaluate to 77. We analyzed these cases (based on their progress as
of May 22, 2023), excluding ones which did not meet the criteria. We did not include
cases which involved voluntary dismissal or where the motion to dismiss was granted
in part. This gave us a set of 30 cases.
In order to draft our AI-generated complaints, we provided ChatGPT with the facts
as presented in Law360 9 articles about the filing of a particular complaint. Law360,
a subsidiary of LexisNexis, is a reputable source of legal news that writes stories on
major cases summarizing the facts from the complaint when it was filed (see Section
2.2.2 below). Prior legal research (see (Ahmad et al, 2022) and (Kacperczyk and
Pagnotta, 2024)) has utilized Law360 databases. While these articles are unlikely to be
9https://www.law360.com/

[PAGE 16]
completely representative of the facts that would have been available to plaintiffs and
their lawyers when the complaints were originally drafted, these types of legal news
articles are the best approximation we have thereof. We excluded any cases for which
there was either (a) no Law360 article, or (b) the only articles were about another
filing (rather than the complaint). After doing this, nine cases remained in our data
set. We note that, in cases where an amended complaint was filed, we used whichever
complaint was referenced in the Law360 article as our lawyer-drafted complaint.
For full details on the selection process, including the reasons for exclusion for each
of the cases in the set, see Appendix C.2. Our final nine cases can be found in Table
1 below.
Dismissed Continued
Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al. , case number 1:20-cv-02803, in the U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of New
York
Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. , case
number 1:20-cv-03829, in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
New York
Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase Global
Inc., case number 1:21-cv-08353, in the
U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of New York
Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd. , case
number 2:18-cv-00804, in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of
Pennsylvania
Brola v. Nano, et al. , case number
1:18-cv-02049, in U.S. District Court
for the Eastern District of New York
Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. , case number 3:16-cv-00940, in the U.S. District
Court of Connecticut
Ha v. Overstock.com, et al. , case number 2:19-cv-00709, in the U.S. District
Court for the District of Utah
Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments
Inc., et al. , case number 2:18-cv-14380,
in the U.S. District Court for the District of New Jersey
Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al. , case
number 3:18-cv-00671, in U.S. District
Court for the Northern District of California
T able 1 Final set of cases for mock jurors
2.2.2 ChatGPT-drafted complaints
We prompted ChatGPT to draft complaints using a series of zero-shot prompts. For
further details on the conventions for drafting a legal complaint, see Appendix A. It is
impossible to give ChatGPT the exact same set of facts that the lawyer had to draft
the original complaint because we do not have access to that information. However,
we are not testing ChatGPT’s ability to discern which facts, from a set of facts, are
most relevant legally, but rather its ability to draft a convincing complaint from a
given set of facts.
With that in mind, rather than manually extracting the facts of the case from the
complaint, we used the facts as presented in the Law360 summary of the case when
it was filed. We gave the Law360 article (verbatim, excluding the case number and
counsel information) to ChatGPT and asked it to write each section of a complaint for
a particular United States District Court (the one where the real complaint was filed).

[PAGE 17]
We found that asking ChatGPT for each section of the complaint individually resulted
in more detailed and higher quality outputs (as Choi et al (2023) also found in asking it
to draft essays). When we simply asked ChatGPT to draft the whole complaint (even
when the sections and suggested length were specified), it produced a short, sparse
complaint. We tested our prompts on our sample case, SEC v. Kaplan, et al. The
Law360 articles used in our prompts were the following: (Perera, 2023; Guarnaccia,
2019; Ruscoe, 2019; Sinay, 2020b,a; Archer, 2016; Newsham, 2018; Kochman, 2018;
Wichert, 2018; Jarvis, 2022; Innis, 2022). For further details of our prompt design
process, see Appendix B.2.
We note that, for this part of our research, we were unable to use the OpenAI
API. When we submitted our prompts to the API, we received an error. We were,
ultimately, able to generate the desired text by adding “for educational purposes only”
to our prompt and using the ChatGPT user interface, specifically the May 24, 2023
GPT-3.5 version, which uses the gpt-3.5-turbo-0301 model. For full details of the
original output error and associated prompt design considerations, see Appendix B.2.
Our final prompt format is as follows:
• Prompt 1: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the caption of a class action complaint for the [ insert venue ].
• Prompt 2: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the preliminary statement of a class action complaint for the
[insert venue ].
• Prompt 3: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the jurisdiction section of a class action complaint for the [insert
venue].
• Prompt 4: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the parties section of a class action complaint for the [ insert
venue].
• Prompt 5: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the factual allegations section of a class action complaint for the
[insert venue ].
• Prompt 6: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the class allegations section of a class action complaint for the
[insert venue ].

[PAGE 18]
• Prompt 7: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the legal claims for relief section of a class action complaint for
the [insert venue ].
• Prompt 8: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the prayer for relief section of a class action complaint for the
[insert venue ].
• Prompt 9: The following article contains facts summarizing a class action complaint
filed in the [ insert venue ]. [Text from the Law360 article about this complaint being
filed]. For educational purposes only, based on the facts summarized and provided
above, please draft the jury demand section of a class action complaint for the [insert
venue].
We generated each prompt once. Where ChatGPT failed to generate an appropriate
caption section for a specific complaint (n = 2), we used the caption section generated
by another prompt for the same case, because each section generated tended to also
include the caption as well. We note that, because we used the ChatGPT user interface,
we were unable to control the temperature in this part of the study.
We then compiled each of the sections of the complaint generated by ChatGPT
into a single document. We excluded anything generated for other sections besides that
specified in the particular prompt (i.e., in the output for the caption prompt, we only
transposed the caption of the complaint, rather than any output in the “preliminary
statement” or other sections, if generated by ChatGPT).
We removed parts of the complaint where ChatGPT indicated a fact that was
not included in the article would need to be added. For example, if the AI-generated
text for the “parties” section was “Plaintiff A is an individual who resides in [insert
state]”, we kept only “Plaintiff A is an individual”. We also removed any instances
where ChatGPT suggested we insert a particular dollar amount and, if the dates of
the class period were not present in the Law360 article, we simply included “during
the class period” in the text, rather than adding the specific dates.
Our final ChatGPT-drafted complaints, including that for our sample case, can be
found in Appendix E.
2.2.3 Lawyer-drafted complaints
Naturally, the Law360 articles do not contain all the facts that were included in the
original lawyer-drafted complaints, but rather a high-level summary thereof. Therefore, for the purpose of our study, we needed to manually edit the lawyer-drafted
complaints and remove all text that referenced facts which were not included in the
article, so that the lawyer-drafted versions could be meaningfully compared to the
AI-generated ones.
This was also beneficial in terms of reducing the length of the complaints our
mock jurors needed to read to reach their decisions; some of the original complaints

[PAGE 19]
were more than 200 pages long, which would be impractical for jurors in this study to
read in their entirety. We also removed the following: any charges outside of those on
which we asked our mock jurors to make decisions (see section 2.2.5 below); footnotes;
indications that emphasis was added; background information on cryptocurrencies;
and the case number.
Willmott et al (2018) similarly reduced the length of the case document they used
in their mock jury study (in their case, a trial transcript). Though it was a concern,
this process did not seem to harm the quality of the lawyer-drafted complaints. For
each complaint, we confirmed the document still read well after our deletions and we
found we did not need to make any additional amendments. Though we acknowledge
that these exclusions pose a risk of reducing the persuasiveness of the lawyer-drafted
complaints, given that our mock jurors ultimately considered the charges in the lawyerdrafted complaints to be proven 88% of the time, this did not seem to be the case.
We note that, in one case,Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. , case number 3:16-cv-00940,
in the U.S. District Court of Connecticut, there was an error in the Law360 article,
which wrongly referred to “Hashstakers” as “Hashstalkers”. Therefore, we changed
all instances of the word “Hashstakers” to “Hashstalkers” in the lawyer-generated
complaint to facilitate comparison with the AI-generated one based on the article.
We also changed the formatting of these complaints, so all the complaints presented
to our mock jurors were formatted consistently. See Appendix E for the final versions
of our lawyer-drafted complaints, including for our sample case.
2.2.4 Mock juror decision-making
2.2.5 Selecting overlapping charges
Based on the contents of the cases, we selected the particular violations on which to
ask our participants to make judgements. For the sake of comparability, we needed to
look at the same charge for both the ChatGPT-generated version of the complaint and
the original, lawyer-drafted one for each case. To avoid introducing further variables
into our analysis, we sought to choose the smallest number of charges possible which
covered all our cases. As discussed above, we excluded any state-based allegations.
Section 5 and 12(a)(1) Violations of the Securities Act (“the Securities Act violations”, 15 U.S. Code § 77e and 15 U.S. Code § 77l (noa, n.d.a,n)) were charged in
both versions of the complaints for six of our cases, and Violations of Section 10(b)
of the Exchange Act and Rule 10b-5 thereunder (“the Exchange Act violations”, 15
U.S. Code § 78j (Legal Information Institute, n.d.b)) were included in both versions
of the complaints for four cases. One case ( Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. ) included
both charges, so we asked one set of participants to evaluate it for the Securities Act
violations and another for the Exchange Act violations. This, effectively, gave us a
set of 10 cases (considering Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. was included in the set
twice). For full details of the charge selection process, see Appendix F.
2.2.6 Jury instructions
We drafted jury instructions for each of our violations to determine the criteria upon
which our mock jurors would decide if the relevant violations were proven in the

[PAGE 20]
complaint. We aligned the jury instructions for each of the violations we studied very
closely with jury instructions for the same charges in real cases.
We based our jury instructions for the Securities Act violations on (Dalton, 2013;
Ninth Circuit Jury Instructions Committee, 2023). For the Exchange Act violations,
we modeled our jury instructions on (Martin, 2013). The jury instructions each began
with an introduction to securities laws and the claims in question. A series of five legal
questions followed, each prefaced by relevant legal definitions and context. Each of the
first four questions corresponds to one element of the charge that must be proven for
the charge to be proven. The fifth question asked whether the juror answered the first
four questions affirmatively (indicating a violation was proven). If they answered “no”
to any of the questions, the allegation was not proven. In our study, we instructed the
jury members to assume that the facts presented in the complaints were true. The
legal questions were all binary (with “yes” or “no” answers).
In a court case, the jury would need to decide on the legal elements of the case for
each defendant individually. However, to simplify the process, because we are merely
testing whether ChatGPT could write a convincing complaint based on certain facts,
and because we abridged the amended complaints, we asked the jurors if they were
satisfied that a particular element was supported—assuming all the facts alleged were
true—for one or more defendants.
Following Willmott et al (2018) and Stevens et al (2022), the final question of our
jury instructions asked the jurors to rate their confidence in their final decision in the
case on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 meaning extremely confident and 1 meaning not at
all confident.
Once we had drafts of our jury instructions, we piloted the survey for our sample complaint (which contained the Securities Act charges) on an individual without
legal knowledge, noting the amount of time it took him to complete the survey and
any confusion during the process. This led us to amend the instructions slightly: for
example, they were edited to specify, in question four, that the plaintiff needed to have
suffered financial damages specifically.
Table 2 includes questions for each of our charges (excluding the background
information). Our complete, final jury instructions can be found in Appendix G.
2.2.7 Survey
We used Qualtrics to host our survey and Prolific to recruit our participants. Prolific provides pre-vetted candidates for research surveys (noa, 2014). Each respondent
received one of the 20 total complaints and the corresponding jury survey for the
charge in that complaint. Our final data set included 88 respondents. For further
details on our pre-screening, execution, demographic data, and quality control process,
see Appendix H.

[PAGE 21]
Securities Act Exchange Act Violations
1. Assuming the facts alleged in the complaint you read are true, and noting the
definitions of a security and sale thereof
provided above, do you find that one or
more of the defendants directly or indirectly sold securities to the plaintiff?
1. Assuming the facts alleged in the complaint you read are true, and noting the
definitions provided above, do you find
that one or more defendants (a) used a
device, scheme or artifice to defraud, (b)
made an untrue statement of material fact
or made a statement that was misleading
because a material fact was omitted, OR
(c) engaged in any act, practice, or course
of business which operated as a fraud or
deceit upon any person?
2. Assuming the facts alleged in the complaint you read are true, and noting the
definitions of “interstate commerce” and
“instrument of transportation or communication” provided above, do you find that
one or more defendants used an instrument of transportation or communication
in interstate commerce in connection with
the offer or sale of a security?
2. Assuming the facts alleged in the complaint you read are true, do you find that
one or more defendants engaged in fraudulent conduct “in connection with” the
purchase or sale of a security?
3. Assuming the facts alleged in the complaint you read are true, do you find that
“the securities at issue weren’t registered”
(Dalton, 2013)?
3. Assuming the facts alleged in the complaint you read are true, do you find that
one or more of the defendants acted knowingly or with severe recklessness?
4. Do you find that the plaintiff suffered
financial damages?
4. Assuming the facts alleged in the complaint you read are true, do you find
that one or more of the defendants’ conduct involved interstate commerce, the
use of the mails, or a national securities
exchange?
5. Did you answer “yes” to all of questions
1, 2, 3, and 4?
5. Did you answer “yes” to all of questions
1, 2, 3, and 4?
6. Thinking about your answers to questions 1-5, how confident are you, overall,
that you have made the correct decision?
Please rate your confidence on a scale of 1
to 5, with 5 being extremely confident and
1 being not confident at all.
6. Thinking about your answers to questions 1-5, how confident are you, overall,
that you have made the correct decision?
Please rate your confidence on a scale of 1
to 5, with 5 being extremely confident and
1 being not confident at all.
T able 2 Abridged jury instructions
3 Results
3.1 GPT-3.5’s ability to discern violations of federal U.S. law
Overall, GPT-3.5’s ability to determine violations of U.S. federal law from a set of facts
was poor, with an average final score across all cases and all runs ( n = 100) of 0.324
(SD = 0.317) with a 95% confidence interval around the mean of [0 .262–0.386]. The
full performance metrics are reported in Table 3. For five cases ( Mark Winter, et al.
v. Stronghold Digital Mining, Inc., et al. , 1:22-CV-03088, SDNY; Philip Golubowski,
et al. v. Robinhood Markets, Inc., et al. , 5: 21-CV-09767, N.D. Ca.; Underwood, et al.
v. Coinbase Global Inc. , 1:21-cv-08353, SDNY; Securities and Exchange Commission

[PAGE 22]
v. Green United, LLC, et al. , 2:23-cv-00159, D. Utah; Securities and Exchange Commission v. Paul A. Garcia , 1:22-cv-00118, D. Colo.), the LLM did not determine any
of the charges correctly in any of the outputs.
We note that, in general, precision (with a mean value of 0.66) tended to be higher
than recall (which had a mean value of 0.25). This reflects the fact that the outputs
were particularly prone to false negatives: when violations were identified, they tended
to be correct, but the main shortcoming was the failure to identify violations. In
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Arbitrade Ltd., et al. , for example, GPT-3.5
produced false negatives between 8 and 8.5 of the 9 total charges, only identifying
between 0.5 and 1 correct charge. This is more promising in terms of LLMs’ usefulness
as a tool to assist lawyers; it is much better for a case to exclude potentially relevant
allegations, than to include entirely incorrect ones.
Metric Mean SD
Recall 0.252 0.304
Precision 0.658 0.459
Final score 0.324 0.317
T able 3 GPT-3.5’s ability to
discern violations of U.S.
securities laws, average metrics
across all outputs ( n = 100)
3.2 ChatGPT’s pleading drafting ability
The raw data from our surveys can be found in Appendix I. Demographic data on the
respondents can be found in Appendix H.
3.2.1 Respondent agreement
To answer our question of whether jurors’ decisions on complaints differed depending
on their authors (AI versus a human lawyer), we first examined the levels of agreement
among the reviewers for each of our cases. We examined this for the final decision as
to whether or not the charge in question was proven (based on question 5, “Did you
answer “yes” to all of questions 1, 2, 3, and 4?”). The participants decided that the
cases were proven in almost all instances ( n = 74), regardless of the author (84.1%).
Since we only sought to evaluate agreement based on this final (binary) question, we
simply calculated the percentage of the total participants who agreed that the charge
in question was proven.10 Therefore, a percentage closer to either 0% or 100% (i.e., no
jurors thought the charge was proven (0%) or all the jurors agreed it was (100%)) would
indicate high levels of agreement, while a percentage closer to 50% would indicate less
agreement. As reported in Table 4, the level of agreement was moderate, overall, for
most of our cases. The level of agreement was at chance (50%) for three of our cases,
two of which were drafted by ChatGPT and one of which was drafted by a lawyer.
10We acknowledge that there are various statistical measures used to calculate coder agreement, such as
Cohen’s Kappa. However, because the conclusion of each of our mock jurors was the answer to a single,
binary question, using such a metric was not necessary in this case.

[TABLE page=22 index=1]
Columns: Metric | Mean | SD
Row 1: Metric: Recall | Mean: 0.252 | SD: 0.304
Row 2: Metric: Precision | Mean: 0.658 | SD: 0.459
Row 3: Metric: Final score | Mean: 0.324 | SD: 0.317
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 23]
Case Number of
Participants
% Y es
Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al. , GPT-drafted complaint 4 75%
Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al. , lawyer-drafted complaint 4 100%
Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase, et al. , GPT-drafted complaint
6 83.3%
Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase, et al. , lawyer-drafted complaint
5 80%
Brola v. Nano, et al. , GPT-drafted complaint 4 100%
Brola v. Nano, et al. , lawyer-drafted complaint 4 75%
Ha v. Overstock.com, et al. , GPT-drafted complaint 4 75%
Ha v. Overstock.com, et al. , lawyer-drafted complaint 5 100%
Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. , GPT-drafted complaint,
Securities Act charge
4 100%
Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. , lawyer-drafted complaint,
Securities Act Charge
4 100%
Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. , GPT-drafted complaint,
Exchange Act charge
6 83.3%
Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. , lawyer-drafted complaint,
Exchange Act charge
4 50%
Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd. , GPT-drafted complaint 4 100%
Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd. , lawyer-drafted complaint 4 100%
Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. , GPT-drafted complaint 5 50%
Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. , lawyer-drafted complaint 4 75%
Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al. , GPTdrafted complaint
4 50%
Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al. , lawyerdrafted complaint
4 100%
Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al. , GPT-drafted complaint 5 80%
Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al. , lawyer-drafted complaint
4 100%
T able 4 Respondent agreement on decisions
3.2.2 Juror confidence
We sought to examine whether juror confidence (on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being
not confident at all and 5 being extremely confident) was different for complaints
drafted by ChatGPT compared to those drafted by lawyers. To test this, we compared
the mean confidences using a Mann Whitney U-test. 11 The mean juror confidence
for ChatGPT-generated complaints was 3.78, which a standard deviation of 0.99. For
lawyer-drafted complaints, our jurors’ mean confidence was 3.98, with a standard
deviation of 0.84. There was no evidence that our jurors’ confidence scores differed
between the two categories of authors ( U = 1060, p = 0 .371, ef f ect size = 0 .095
(Karadimitriou and Marshall, n.d.)). This suggests that ChatGPT performed well at
this legal drafting task.
11We used this non-parametric test because our data were not normally distributed, as per the ShapiroWilk test, the results of which are reported in Appendix J. We used the Mann-Whitney U test because our
samples were still independent.

[TABLE page=23 index=1]
Columns: Case | Number of | Unnamed: 0 | % Yes
Row 1: Case: | Number of: Participants | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 2: Case: Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al., GPT-drafted complaint | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 75%
Row 3: Case: Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al., lawyer-drafted complaint | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 4: Case: Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase, et al., GPT-drafted com- | Number of: 6 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 83.3%
Row 5: Case: plaint | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 6: Case: Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase, et al., lawyer-drafted com- | Number of: 5 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 80%
Row 7: Case: plaint | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 8: Case: Brola v. Nano, et al., GPT-drafted complaint | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 9: Case: Brola v. Nano, et al., lawyer-drafted complaint | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 75%
Row 10: Case: Ha v. Overstock.com, et al., GPT-drafted complaint | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 75%
Row 11: Case: Ha v. Overstock.com, et al., lawyer-drafted complaint | Number of: 5 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 12: Case: Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al., GPT-drafted complaint, | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 13: Case: Securities Act charge | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 14: Case: Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al., lawyer-drafted complaint, | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 15: Case: Securities Act Charge | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 16: Case: Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al., GPT-drafted complaint, | Number of: 6 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 83.3%
Row 17: Case: Exchange Act charge | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 18: Case: Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al., lawyer-drafted complaint, | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 50%
Row 19: Case: Exchange Act charge | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 20: Case: Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd., GPT-drafted complaint | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 21: Case: Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd., lawyer-drafted complaint | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 22: Case: Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al., GPT-drafted complaint | Number of: 5 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 50%
Row 23: Case: Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al., lawyer-drafted complaint | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 75%
Row 24: Case: Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al., GPT- | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 50%
Row 25: Case: drafted complaint | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 26: Case: Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al., lawyer- | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 27: Case: drafted complaint | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
Row 28: Case: Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al., GPT-drafted complaint | Number of: 5 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 80%
Row 29: Case: Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al., lawyer-drafted com- | Number of: 4 | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes: 100%
Row 30: Case: plaint | Number of: | Unnamed: 0: | % Yes:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 24]
3.2.3 Association between author and juror decision
Next, we looked at whether the author (human vs. ChatGPT) and the ultimate decision were associated in our cases using Fisher’s Exact test. Table 5 reports the two-way
table for our data.
ChatGPT Lawyer T otal
Proven No 9 (19.6%) 5 (11.9%) 14 (15.9%)
Y es 37 (80.4%) 37 (88.1%) 74 (84.1%)
T otal 46 42 88
T able 5 Two-way table for author and juror decision
Fisher’s Exact test indicated that the author was not statistically significantly
associated with the decision made by the respondents (p = 0.39). This, again, suggests
that ChatGPT’s performance at this legal drafting task was as good as that of a
lawyer.
3.2.4 Qualitative analysis of complaints
We qualitatively compared the complaints ChatGPT produced with those written by
lawyers. Overall, it was difficult to distinguish the complaints based on the author.
The primary difference between the complaints drafted by each category of author was
that the AI-generated versions were slightly more concise and less detailed. In general,
we observed that the AI-drafted complaints were more straightforward, an effect we
report linguistic analyses and quantitative findings on in Section 3.2.5.
Somewhat notably, ChatGPT performed the worst at drafting captions for complaints, and this section needed to be regenerated more often than other sections
(though, still, seldom, in only the Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al., Underwood, et al.
v. Coinbase Global Inc. and Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. cases). For all sections,
ChatGPT tended to include some sections of the complaint outside of that specified
in the prompt (including, sometimes, an entire, very short complaint, similar to that
in (Perlman, 2022)). However, it appeared to focus primarily on the section included
in the prompt.
In one case, Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. , we noted the different sections of
the complaint generated were slightly inconsistent. For example, in the jurisdiction
section, the complaint refers to violations of Section 12(a)(2) of the Securities Act,
while the actual charge included in the legal claims for relief was Section 12(a)(1)
thereof. Furthermore, in another case, Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. , the complaint
includes different locations for one of the parties in different sections.
One of the key issues with using ChatGPT for legal tasks that others have noted
as a risk (for example, (Choi et al, 2023)), is its tendency to hallucinate or “fabricate”
facts or statutes. We did notice this in two instances, namely that ChatGPT added
“John Doe” defendants in two complaints (Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al., Klingberg
v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al. ). Our finding that ChatGPT hallucinated
defendants in these two cases is consistent with our observation that ChatGPT was
least successful in generating the output for the caption section.

[TABLE page=24 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | ChatGPT | Lawyer | Total
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Proven | Unnamed: 1: No | ChatGPT: 9 (19.6%) | Lawyer: 5 (11.9%) | Total: 14 (15.9%)
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Yes | ChatGPT: 37 (80.4%) | Lawyer: 37 (88.1%) | Total: 74 (84.1%)
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Total | Unnamed: 1: | ChatGPT: 46 | Lawyer: 42 | Total: 88
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 25]
We noticed that the complaint quality varied slightly among different jurisdictions
(for example, the Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al. complaint in
the District of New Jersey was of slightly poorer quality than the Underwood et al.
v. Coinbase Global Inc. one in the SDNY), though we did not quantify this effect.
Furthermore, the ChatGPT-generated complaint for the Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al.
case was of slightly lower quality than some of the others. We hypothesized that this
was because the article for the case was less focused (at least, as per our qualitative
evaluation), and included facts from several other cases. We test this hypothesis in
Section 3.2.5 below.
Finally, an important consideration in terms of ChatGPT’s legal drafting ability is
the level of human intervention required to produce the final complaint. In our study,
post-editing the lawyer-drafted complaints to exclude facts that were not present in
the Law360 article was more labor-intensive than post-editing the ChatGPT-generated
complaints. Aside from the two cases where we needed to remove the additional “John
Doe” defendants ChatGPT hallucinated, and where we needed to revise one reference
to the specific section of the Securities Act that was violated, the remainder of the
deletions occurred where ChatGPT had inserted placeholder text, the need for specific
details should be inserted (such as the Plaintiff’s residence or the dates of the class
period), which were absent from the Law360 article. The only other time we needed
to remove information ChatGPT included was in the Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al.
complaint, where we excluded the specific (and different) locations it generated for a
party in different sections of the complaint.
Finally, we noticed a few stylistic differences between ChatGPT- and lawyerdrafted complaints. ChatGPT did not include any sub-headings in its sections,
though these are quite common in lawyer-drafted complaints. Furthermore, ChatGPT
frequently (and without any seeming purpose) added “wherefore” before sentences.
3.2.5 Quantifying complaint concreteness
Our primary qualitative finding that the ChatGPT-drafted complaints were more
straightforward than the lawyer-drafted ones motivated us to quantify this effect. We
used the concept of concreteness, from the field of computational linguistics, to test
this (Kleinberg et al, 2019). In language, concreteness means “the degree to which
the concept denoted by a word refers to a perceptible entity” (Brysbaert et al, 2014).
We measure concreteness using Brysbaert et al’s (2014) concreteness dictionary. In
developing this data set, the researchers asked 4,000 human participants to score
almost 40,000 words on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 meaning abstract and 5 meaning
concrete. Abstract words have “meanings that cannot be experienced directly but
which we know because the meanings can be defined by other words”, while concrete
ones are those which one “can experience directly through one of the five senses”
(Brysbaert et al, 2014).
To calculate the concreteness of our complaints, we tokenized the text from each
complaint. For each token within each text, we obtained the average concreteness
score therefor from the Brysbaert et al (2014) data set. We used code published by
Kleinberg et al (2019) for this task. The average concreteness score of all the tokens

[PAGE 26]
for each complaint constituted our final concreteness score. We used a t-test to determine whether the concreteness scores for the complaints written by ChatGPT were
significantly different from those written by lawyers.12 The average concreteness score
for the ChatGPT-drafted complaints was 2.30 ( SD = 0.06). For lawyer-drafted complaints, the average concreteness was lower, at 2.25 ( SD = 0 .06). The concreteness
scores for each complaint are reported in Appendix K.
According to our t-test, the average concreteness scores were significantly different
between the two authorship categories, with a large effect size ( t(8) = 3.25, p = 0.012,
Cohen ′s d = 1.08, 99% CI = [−0.02, 2.18]).
Next, we explored whether the level of concreteness in the Law360 article presented to ChatGPT was associated with the level of concreteness in the complaint
ultimately drafted by ChatGPT. To do this, we calculated the concreteness score for
the text of each Law360 article ( M = 2.38, SD = 0.09) fed to ChatGPT and used the
correlation between the Law360 article’s concreteness and the resulting complaint’s
concreteness ( M = 2.30, SD = 0.06) to measure this effect. The Pearson correlation
coefficient between the Law360 article’s concreteness and the concreteness of the AIgenerated complaint was r = 0 .78 (95% CI = [0 .24, 0.95], p = 0 .01). This shows
a statistically significant positive correlation between the Law360 article’s concreteness and the concreteness of the resulting ChatGPT-generated complaint. The higher
the concreteness of the Law360 article, the higher the concreteness of the complaint
generated therefrom.
4 Discussion
4.1 GPT-3.5’s ability to discern violations of U.S. law
This paper tests whether GPT-3.5 can correctly determine which federal U.S. laws
are potentially being violated from a given fact pattern. Overall, GPT-3.5’s ability
to determine potential violations of U.S. law from a given set of facts was poor. The
primary reason for the low overall performance metrics was the high number of false
negatives (i.e., violations it missed which were charged in the complaint). Because of
this, the precision scores tended to be much higher than the other performance metrics.
This shows more promise in terms of LLMs’ ability to conduct legal reasoning
tasks on behalf of lawyers, at least in a preliminary capacity. It would be preferable for
fewer, but correct, charges to be identified, as opposed to the inclusion of erroneous
charges, at least from a malpractice perspective. However, the trade-off of minimizing
the number of false positives is that more manual analysis is, then, required to “fill
out” the appropriate violations. Therefore, using an LLM to assist in legal reasoning
of this nature would only be even somewhat useful at a preliminary stage. In an ideal
world, an LLM would be most useful to lawyers as a “sense check” to make sure
they were not missing any violations, but the observed tendency towards minimizing
false positives means it would not be useful, at present, in this regard. Further to
this, however, the charging decision-making process ordinarily goes through several
12The distribution for our two samples was normal (Shapiro-W ilk = 0.901, p = 0.256 for GPT-generated
complaints, and Shapiro-W ilk = 0 .850, p = 0 .074 for lawyer-generated ones). The variances for both of
our samples were the same.

[PAGE 27]
iterations involving many lawyers. In this sense, the benchmark to which we compare
GPT-3.5’s performance may be unreasonably high.
Despite GPT-3.5 missing several of the violations included in the complaint, its
overall analysis of the facts for the charges it determined correctly was good (though
we can only evaluate this qualitatively), using the legal reasoning framework provided.
This is consistent with Yu et al’s (2022) findings that prompts including the IRAC
legal reasoning framework produced good results. Finally, we expect these models’
performance to improve as they incorporate more data.
Moreover, securities class action cases, in particular, are often dismissed. In a study
of 652 such cases filed between 2006 and 2010, 32% were dismissed with prejudice. After
the first complaint was filed, of 533 cases completed before the study and filed during
the study period, 25% were dismissed with prejudice and 34% were dismissed without
prejudice (Klausner et al, 2013). Therefore, it is possible that several of the charges
GPT-3.5 failed to identify could have later been dismissed or not proven at trial—
in this sense, such charges could in fact be considered to be true, rather than false,
negatives. In that case, if GPT-3.5 only charged violations later confirmed by a judge or
jury, its performance would be considered as good as that of a lawyer (notwithstanding
the potential strategic reasons for including charges that are subsequently dismissed).
We were unable to test this because the cases were ongoing, however, it would be a
fruitful avenue for future studies to explore.
We note that there could be other variables that account for GPT-3.5’s overall
exclusion of many of the relevant violations in the complaint. Overall, it may simply
be more conservative in estimating violations of law than the lawyers who drafted the
complaint. This is something with which future research could experiment in terms
of prompt engineering, for example, by instructing an LLM to “include all charges
for which there is any possibility they might be viable.” Generally, GPT-3.5 cited far
fewer violations of law, with many outputs only suggesting a single violation. This
could also relate to lawyers’ occasional tendency to “stack” charges, often to inspire
defendants to settle more readily. This means our ground truth is not necessarily
objectively consistent either. This is consistent with the high number of false negatives
we saw across our data set.
Furthermore, it could be the case that the facts sections from some of these complaints were written more clearly than others, or at least written in a way that is more
conducive to helping the LLM identify relevant violations of law.
At times, GPT-3.5 did not follow the instructions in the prompt. For example,
despite asking the model to be specific about the sections of statutes which were
violated, sometimes it did not even include the name of a statute at all, let alone
the sections violated. Furthermore, the instructions requested it provide violations of
federal law only; however, at times, it included violations of state law as well. This
was somewhat surprising, particularly compared to other research (such as (Choi et al,
2023)), which found it followed instructions well.
Aside from this, our results are generally consistent with previous research. For
example, Blair-Stanek et al (2023) also found that GPT-3’s statutory reasoning skills

[PAGE 28]
are lacking. Similarly, Choi et al (2023), noted an example of an “issue spotter” question (which refers to a similar task as in our study) in their test; ChatGPT only
spotted one of the five correct issues correctly.
4.2 ChatGPT’s pleading drafting ability
This study also examined whether mock jurors made different legal decisions based on
pleadings written by ChatGPT compared with those written by a lawyer. Overwhelmingly, ChatGPT drafted convincing complaints, which performed only slightly worse
than the lawyer-drafted ones in terms of convincing jurors the allegations were proven
(80% of AI-drafted complaints were proven according to our jurors, compared to 88%
of lawyer-drafted ones). Our data, specifically our findings that complaint author was
not associated with juror decision, and that the distribution of juror confidence did
not differ between different authors, support these conclusions.
We found the lawyer-generated complaints were less concrete than the AI-generated
ones (though we note that, while statistically significant, the difference is minimal in
absolute terms). This supports our qualitative findings that the AI-generated complaints were less abstract and more “to the point” than the lawyer-drafted ones. In
practice, a lawyer using ChatGPT as a drafting assistant would add more abstraction
(as per accepted legal drafting style) to the skeleton version the AI drafted. If lawyers
increasingly use AI tools as drafting assistants, we could, however, see a future stylistic
change in the industry, with less linguistic abstraction overall.
Notably, ChatGPT (and, indeed, lawyers), were able to write convincing complaints even for cases which were ultimately dismissed. In the case of the lawyer-drafted
complaints, abridging these complaints (particularly removing specific charges) may
have removed the sections upon which the judge’s ultimate dismissal decision hinged.
This could explain, in part, why so many cases were proven according to our jurors.
Furthermore, jurors do not reason the same way as judges, and, indeed, the criteria
for dismissal are different than those required to prove a violation. Finally, the mock
jurors in this study did not act like real-world jurors in that we instructed them to
assume all facts in the complaint were true.
Our finding of a positive, statistically significant linear correlation between the level
of concreteness in the Law360 article on which our ChatGPT-generated complaint was
based, and the concreteness score of the resulting complaint, supports the conclusion
that some of the complaint quality was likely associated with the level of detail in the
Law360 articles which were provided as source material.
Other scholars have noted the possibility of ChatGPT having been trained on
some legal sources (Bommarito II and Katz, 2022). We were concerned about this in
answering our second research question, because we had to include cases which were
filed before our model’s training period, due to a lack of cases filed only afterwards
which met our selection criteria. However, consistently with Blair-Stanek et al’s (2023)
results, there was no indication (in our qualitative analysis of the complaints drafted)
that made us suspicious that this was the case in our context (i.e., the ChatGPTdrafted complaint did not generally include facts which were not part of the article in
the prompt). Hallucinations only occurred in three, minor instances. In two complaints
(Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al., Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al. ),

[PAGE 29]
this took the form of ChatGPT inaccurately adding “John Doe” defendants, rather
than devising specific, fictitious facts. In the third case ( Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. ),
the location of a company involved was inconsistent across different sections of the
complaint ChatGPT generated. This was a large, multinational company, and it may
be the case that ChatGPT’s training data included information about multiple of its
locations (but, not likely about this case).
Our finding that complaints written for the SDNY were of a higher standard than
those in the District of New Jersey, is intuitive, since more civil securities and commodity suits tend to be filed in the SDNY than any other jurisdiction, so the training
data set likely would have included more cases from this jurisdiction, if it included
any at all. For example, in March 2021, 36.8% of suits of this nature were filed in the
SDNY, compared to only 11.9% for the next most popular filing jurisdiction (TRAC,
2021).
Overall, our results are consistent with prior research that qualitatively determined
that ChatGPT showed some skill in drafting legal documents (Iu and Wong, 2023;
Perlman, 2022). Similarly, Choi et al (2023)’s finding that ChatGPT performed better on essay questions than multiple choice ones is consistent with our finding that
ChatGPT performed better in drafting than in statutory reasoning.
4.3 Limitations and future research
Normally, jurors do not evaluate complaints, and, before a jury decides a case, they
are presented with manifold evidence (and corroborating witness testimony) and summative arguments of the facts and legal issues from lawyers. They also have the
opportunity to deliberate with their fellow jurors. In our study, we sought to obtain
a baseline for juror decision-making based on a single document, assuming the facts,
as presented, are true. Future research could explore conducting an entire mock trial
using ChatGPT, rather than abstracting a specific element of the legal process as we
have done, or employ lawyers to evaluate ChatGPT- and lawyer-generated complaints
rather than laypeople.
Furthermore, there is no way to access all of the facts that the lawyers had when
they were drafting the original complaints. We concluded that the best way to, therefore, “feed” ChatGPT the facts of each case would be to provide a summary of the
facts and allegations from a reputable news outlet (in this case, we used Law360). One
of the primary concerns with this is that the facts espoused in the article were pulled
from the original complaint itself. However, since in this part of our research we are
were merely testing ChatGPT’s legal writing ability (i.e., its capacity to, given a set
of facts and allegations, draft a pleading), we proceeded in this manner.
The lawyer-drafted complaints, also, naturally, frame the facts in a manner that
supports the charges they assert. Assuming these framing choices are reflected in the
Law360 article, it is possible that ChatGPT could produce convincing complaints by
merely paraphrasing the article. Put simply, the input given to ChatGPT is already
(indirectly) the product of some evaluation by a human lawyer, and so does not entirely
reflect the “raw” form of the facts of the case. Again, since our aim is to obtain a
baseline of ChatGPT’s legal drafting capabilities, this input still allows this to be
established; however, future research could explore performance when provided with

[PAGE 30]
more basic input. Finally, Law360 does require a subscription, which could hinder the
reproducibility of results. However, they offer free trials which would be sufficient for
this purpose.
In the first part of our study, we decided not to test any cases that were filed before
our model’s training cut-off date in June 2021. Due to the lengthy nature of the legal
process, these cases had generally not yet been decided. Therefore, we needed to use
the charges in the complaints as our ground truth, though lawyers’ judgments are not
infallible—nor indeed are they always based purely on the factual “correctness” of
charges. Lawyers may choose to file, or not to file, charges for other strategic reasons,
and so the goals of lawyers may not be perfectly aligned with the task that an LLM
is seeking to carry out. Future research could employ a set of lawyers to evaluate the
LLM-generated charges, without considering strategic factors. Similarly, in the second
part of our study, a judge’s decision to deny or grant a motion to dismiss is subjective,
and some could consider the decision incorrect. However, in this study, we sought to
evaluate ChatGPT’s drafting and decision-making, not that of lawyers and judges.
Additionally, all our complaints required human intervention, whether drafted by
ChatGPT or a lawyer. Overall, the post-edits for the lawyer-generated complaints
were much more extensive than for the ChatGPT-generated ones. With a few, minor
exceptions (discussed in detail in Section 3.2.4), our amendments generally involved
removing placeholder text ChatGPT provided. This level of intervention is consistent
with our goal of evaluating ChatGPT’s ability to assist lawyers in the legal drafting
process. Future research could experiment with providing pure facts to ChatGPT and
prompting the model to generate complaints in the same manner as we did—without
any additional alterations—to determine if ChatGPT could perform satisfactorily as
a lawyer on its own.
Finally, there are some limitations associated with using participants from Prolific
in a study. First, some participants completed our survey very quickly ( median =
12:49:59 for all participants, including those whose entries were, ultimately, rejected),
though we accounted for this in our quality control procedures, the details of which
can be found in Appendix H. In any case, this kind of variability would be normal
on a real-life jury as well. Furthermore, the high cost of using this platform meant we
could not recruit more jury participants. This is somewhat exacerbated by the fact
that few cases existed overall which met our inclusion criteria, making it slightly more
difficult to generalise based on our results.
Future research could use longer factual texts to determine whether the length
affects the output, test these prompts on more powerful models, use different parameters to test these or related prompts, or test these prompt formats on other types of
cases. Future research could also explore LLMs’ legal reasoning and drafting capabilities in other jurisdictions. This may be particularly interesting in jurisdictions where
case documents are not available online (and, therefore, they would be unlikely to
have been trained on relevant examples thereof).

[PAGE 31]
4.4 Conclusions: Do LLMs have the potential to meaningfully
assist lawyers?
In this study, we systematically evaluated GPT-3.5’s and ChatGPT’s potential usefulness in assisting with key elements of the legal process, namely legal reasoning and
drafting. To this end, we used cryptocurrency securities cases as an example of the
many potential areas of law where such support could be useful. Ours is the first study
to systematically examine LLMs’ legal drafting and reasoning capabilities in a) litigation, b) the context of securities law, or c) in cases involving cryptocurrencies. We
conducted two investigations—one involving asking GPT-3.5 an open-ended legal reasoning question, and the other a mock jury exercise requiring jurors to make decisions
based on documents drafted by either ChatGPT or a human lawyer. Consistently with
previous research, we found that the LLM was able to determine some federal civil
laws which were potentially being violated in a given fact pattern from a real-world
case; however, it tended to miss several salient violations. Nevertheless, we expect
LLMs’ capabilities in this regard to improve as the models advance further. In contrast, again similarly to other preliminary empirical research and anecdotal evidence,
ChatGPT performed well at the legal drafting task, namely drafting a complaint in
a securities cryptocurrency class action lawsuit using facts from real-life cases. While
GPT-3.5’s current inability to perform a legal task as basic as legal reasoning means
that it is unlikely to replace lawyers any time soon, ChatGPT’s legal drafting skills
may be able to support lawyers by reducing drafting time for key legal documents.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Antonis Papasavva for participating in the pilot phase of our
study and his valuable feedback. We also thank Anne Coventry for her assistance in
conceptualizing our study and review of the legal concepts presented in this paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding
This project was funded by UK EPSRC Grant EP/S022503/1 which supports the
Centre for Doctoral Training in Cybersecurity at UCL.
Author’s contributions
All authors contributed to the study conception and design. Material preparation,
data collection and analysis were performed by AT. The first draft of the manuscript
was written by AT and all authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

[PAGE 32]
Appendix A Securities class action suit procedures
A.1 U.S. civil procedure
To commence a civil case in a U.S. federal court,13 the plaintiff (the party bringing the
case) files what is called a complaint. This pleading is a legal document that includes
the basis of the court’s jurisdiction, the claims being brought, and what is referred to
as a “prayer for the relief” that the plaintiff seeks in response to the defendant’s alleged
wrongdoing (McRae et al, 2023). A complaint must include the following required
elements:
• A “caption” at the top, which is a heading that includes the court’s name, the
docket number (this is the case number, which the court assigns), the names of
the parties, and “Complaint” as the document title. If the case is a class action
matter (described below), this must also be included in the caption (Practical Law
Litigation, 2023a).
• A jury demand if the plaintiff wants a jury to decide the case (Practical Law
Litigation, 2023a).
• Various, specific sections in the body of the complaint:
– Preliminary statement , which provides an overview of the case, “identifies the
main parties, important facts, legal causes of action, and relief sought” (Practical
Law Litigation, 2023a).
– Jurisdiction, which briefly explains why the court has jurisdiction over this case.
– Venue, which describes why this district court is the correct one to hear this case.
District courts are federal trial courts in the U.S.
– Parties, which describes the plaintiffs and the defendants in the case, including
why the court has jurisdiction over the defendants and the subject matter in
question.
– Facts, which lays out the events and defendant’s actions, on which the plaintiff’s
legal claims are based.
– Legal claims, each of which is one “Count” against the defendant. Each count is
a separate section and explains why the facts of the case support each allegation.
At the end of each section, the plaintiff requests the appropriate relief from the
court (Practical Law Litigation, 2023a).
– Prayer for Relief , “reiterating the remedies sought for each count in the
complaint” (Practical Law Litigation, 2023a).
– Signature block, with the plaintiff’s attorneys’ information and a signature.
All paragraphs in the complaint are numbered and there may be sub-headings
within each section. Certain exhibits can be attached to the complaint to verify the
allegations contained therein. “If the plaintiff does not know all of the facts at the
time it files the complaint, it may allege certain facts are true based on “information
and belief”” (Practical Law Litigation, 2023a).
13Federal courts have jurisdiction over violations of federal law (Practical Law, 2023). Federal Courts can
also exercise diversity jurisdiction where the amount in controversy exceeds $5 million and on the basis of
geographic diversity between plaintiffs and defendants (Lender et al, 2023).

[PAGE 33]
Once filed with the court with the appropriate filing fee, the plaintiffs must serve
this complaint on the defendant. The defendant must then respond to the complaint
within a set period of time, either with an “answer” to the complaint, or a pre-answer
motion, the most common of which is a motion to dismiss (MTD). An answer responds
to the allegations in the complaint, offers general legal defenses to the allegations, and
may include counterclaims against the plaintiff (McRae et al, 2023). A MTD includes
legal arguments as to why a case is not valid and should be thrown out by the judge. “In
ruling on a motion to dismiss, the court must accept the nonmoving party’s allegations
as true and usually may not consider extrinsic evidence” (McRae et al, 2023).
Next, the parties begin gathering facts about the case, preserve the necessary
evidence, etc. (McRae et al, 2023). What is called “motion practice” begins (these
are called “pre-trial” motions if a trial is demanded by the plaintiff), whereby each
party files various motions with the court (and legal memoranda or briefs that support
these motions as well as relevant evidence) (Practical Law Litigation, 2023d). Motions
are, essentially, lawyers’ requests to the court for decisions on legal or procedural
issues in connection with the case. There are various categories of motions. The first
category is nondispositive motions, which include motions for other parties (not named
in the case) to intervene, motions to amend pleadings, and motions for attorneys to
be admitted pro hac vice (meaning they wish to appear before a court in which they
are not already formally admitted to practice) (Practical Law Litigation, 2023e).
Discovery motions, which deal with evidence, are also filed. These include, for
example, motions to compel discovery, quash or modify a subpoena, sanction parties
for failure to preserve evidence, and other motions (Practical Law Litigation, 2023b).
Dispositive motions are also common, such as a motion for summary judgment, a
MTD (if not already filed and decided), or a motion for default judgment (Practical
Law Litigation, 2023c).
Finally, attorneys may file evidentiary pre-trial motions, such as motions in limine, which concern evidence to be presented to the jury, and Daubert motions which
relate to expert testimony (Weinberger et al, 2023). The judge decides on all motions,
sometimes at pre-trial hearings (United States Courts, 2022).
Once pre-trial motions are all decided, the jury selection process begins for federal
trials and jury instructions are submitted. Jury instructions include the legal standards
for the case (i.e., the burden of proof), the laws that must be applied, how the jury
should use the evidence presented at trial and what evidence they can consider, as
well as other legal and practical information (Weinberger et al, 2023). In general,
the burden of proof in civil trials is the “preponderance of evidence” (United States
Courts, 2022). This means that the plaintiff must prove that it is more likely than not
that violation of the law occurred.
During the trial, each side presents their opening statements, introduces evidence
(through witnesses and exhibits), and presents a closing statement. Unless otherwise
decided, the civil jury will contain at least six members and their decision must be
unanimous (Weinberger et al, 2023). 14
14If the jury does not reach a unanimous decision, the judge may instruct them to deliberate further or
order a new trial (noa, 2020).

[PAGE 34]
A.2 Securities class action procedures under the PSLRA
A securities class action case begins when a plaintiff files a securities class action
complaint. If similar actions have already been brought, the plaintiffs may decide
to consolidate them. The court appoints a “lead plaintiff” for the class action. The
defendant(s) then respond, usually with a MTD. Because of the requirements set forth
in the PSLRA, many securities class actions do get dismissed. Cases may be dismissed
for any of the following reasons:
• Lack of jurisdiction of the court (either subject matter or personal);
• Improper process or service thereof;
• “Improper venue” (Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023);
• “Failure to state a claim” (most commonly claimed in securities class action MTDs,
as this reflects the underlying weakness of the case) (Practical Law Securities
Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023); or
• “Failure to join a party” (Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime,
2023).
If the case survives dismissal, the next step is for the plaintiffs to request class
certification by the judge. The general requirements for class certification are:
1. “Commonality, meaning there are questions of law or fact common to the class”
(Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023);
2. “Typicality, meaning that the claims or defenses of the named plaintiff are typical
of the class” (Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023); and
3. “Adequacy, meaning that the named plaintiff must fairly and adequately protect the
interests of the class” (Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime,
2023).
The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure specify three categories of cases which can
be brought as class actions. Every class action case must fit into one of these three
categories. Securities class action suits generally fall under one of the following two
categories:
1. “Common questions predominate over those affecting only individual members”
(Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023); or
2. A class action lawsuit is the most efficient and fair way of resolving the case
(Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023).
The judge decides whether or not to certify the class and the discovery process
ensues. In securities cases, in particular, the discovery process can be quite cumbersome due to the volume of documents involved and may last several years. This is one
reason so many securities class actions settle. While the judge considers a MTD in
a securities class action, discovery is automatically stayed; this is not true in a government enforcement case. At this stage, parties tend to file various motions, such as
motions for summary judgment andDaubert motions. The results of such motions tend
to be leveraged in settlement discussions, which are ongoing throughout this process.
If no settlement is reached, the case then proceeds to trial (Practical Law Securities
Litigation & White Collar Crime, 2023).

[PAGE 35]
Appendix B Prompt design process
B.1 ChatGPT’s ability to discern violations of U.S. law
The following link contains the prompts and outputs with which we experimented
in developing the prompts to answer our first research question. It also describes
our considerations as we fine-tuned the prompts: https://osf.io/ejaxr?view only=
68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.
B.2 Differences in juror decision-making based on human vs.
AI-written legal complaints
The following contains the prompts and outputs with which we experimented in
developing the prompts to answer our second research question. It also describes
our considerations as we fine-tuned the prompts: https://osf.io/wszb2?view only=
68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.
When we submitted our original prompts to the API, we received an error. We
asked what the issue with this prompt was via the ChatGPT user interface, and it
returned the following error message:
“The main issue with the prompt is that it is asking for the generation of a legal document, specifically the sections of a class action complaint for the SDNY, using the
openai.Completion.create()method. However, this method is designed for generating
text based on a given prompt, and it is not suitable for generating complex legal documents
with specific formatting and legal requirements.
Generating a class action complaint requires specialized legal knowledge, attention to
detail, and adherence to legal guidelines and formatting conventions. It is not appropriate
to rely solely on an AI language model to generate such a document, as it may not be
accurate, up-to-date, or tailored to the specific legal context. Legal documents should be
prepared by qualified legal professionals who have expertise in the relevant jurisdiction and
area of law.
If you need assistance with legal matters, I recommend consulting with a licensed attorney who can provide you with the appropriate legal advice and assistance in drafting legal
documents.”
We received a similar error when we tested the same prompt on ChatGPT’s user
interface. We then added a disclaimer to the prompt, indicating the output would be
“for educational purposes only”. We still received an error using the API but were
able to generate the desired text using the ChatGPT user interface, specifically the
May 24, 2023 version.
Appendix C Case selection
C.1 ChatGPT’s ability to discern violations of U.S. law
Details on our reasons for inclusion or exclusion for each cryptocurrency securities
class action lawsuit and cryptocurrency-based SEC case filed before our model’s
training cutoff date (June 2021) can be found here: https://osf.io/ecqas?view only=
68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.

[PAGE 36]
C.2 Differences in juror decision-making based on human vs.
AI-written legal complaints
Details on our reasons for inclusion or exclusion for each cryptocurrency securities
class action lawsuit filed before our case selection date (May 22, 2023) can be found
here: https://osf.io/6we9r?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.
Appendix D Outputs and scoring of ChatGPT’s
identification of potential violations
of U.S. law
The following contains the five GPT-3.5 outputs identifying potential violations of federal civil laws, including the number of input and completion tokens for each prompt:
https://osf.io/jgnea?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.
The following document includes our scores for each of the outputs found in https:
//osf.io/jgnea?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b, including the number of true positives GPT-3.5 identified (TP), false positives (FP), and false negatives
(FN): https://osf.io/txhy9?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.
The following contains the performance metrics for each of our outputs, calculated based on the scores awarded in https://osf.io/txhy9?
view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b: https://osf.io/nhm48?view only=
68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.
Appendix E Complaints
The following links are to the various complaints presented to this study’s participants
in answering our second research question:
E.1 Sample case
• SEC v. Kaplan, et al. , case number 2:23-cv-01648, in the U.S. District Court for the
Eastern District of New York
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/gvfcn?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/2gp8f?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
E.2 Dismissed cases
• Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al. , case number 1:20-cv-02803, in the U.S. District Court
for the Southern District of New York
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/8vmjs?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/v796f?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b

[PAGE 37]
• Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase Global Inc. , case number 1:21-cv-08353, in the U.S.
District Court for the Southern District of New York
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/8p5e3?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/d4t9b?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
• Brola v. Nano, et al. , case number 1:18-cv-02049, in U.S. District Court for the
Eastern District of New York
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/jxwu5?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/zetrw?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
• Ha v. Overstock.com, et al. , case number 2:19-cv-00709, in the U.S. District Court
for the District of Utah
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/572mq?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/qwgzt?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
E.3 Continued cases
• Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. , case number 1:20-cv-03829, in the U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of New York
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/ze6cv?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/7bxfh?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
• Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd. , case number 2:18-cv-00804, in the U.S. District
Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/yjqsw?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/v6gu3?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
• Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. , case number 3:16-cv-00940, in the U.S. District Court
of Connecticut
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/7h2n8?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/ptz69?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b

[PAGE 38]
• Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc. , et al., case number 2:18-cv-14380, in
the U.S. District Court for the District of New Jersey
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/4tzju?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/g3nqc?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
• Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al., case number 3:18-cv-00671, in U.S. District Court
for the Northern District of California
– ChatGPT-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/tkm95?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
– Abridged, lawyer-drafted complaint:
https://osf.io/8wq6m?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b
Appendix F Selecting overlapping charges
For each case, we listed the allegations present in the ChatGPT-generated complaint
alongside the allegations from the original complaint. We then examined the overlapping charges between the two complaints for each case. One case ( Aurelien Beranger,
et al. v. Clifford “T.I.” Joseph Harris, et al. , 1:18-cv-05054, N.D. Ga.) did not have
any overlapping charges between the two complaints, so we excluded it at this stage.
Notably, in some cases (for example, Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd. , in both the
lawyer and the GPT version), only 12(a)(1) was charged but a finding of applicability
of Section 5 is required for this charge.
A couple of cases included Section 20(a) control person liability violations, but
these were less prevalent ( n = 3). Because each of those cases also included at least
one of the other charges we identified, we chose not to include this additional charge.
In a couple of cases (n = 2), the ChatGPT-drafted version of the complaint did not
state the specific statutory violation, but rather a description thereof. For example, in
one case, the relevant count was merely “offering and sale of unregistered securities”. In
this case, we inferred the violation of Sections 5(a), 5(c), and 12(a)(1) of the Securities
Act.
Appendix G Jury instructions
In the following documents, we indicate where language was used from existing case
documents (as is common practice). However, in providing these jury instructions to
our mock jurors, we excluded this information to improve readability.
G.1 Section 5 and Section 12(a)(1) violations
The following link contains the jury instructions for cases alleging violations of the Securities Act: https://osf.io/m9shg?view only=
68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.

[PAGE 39]
G.2 Section 10(b) and Rule 10b-5 violations
The following link contains the jury instructions for cases alleging violations of the
Exchange Act: https://osf.io/u2fn8?view only=68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.
Appendix H Survey execution and quality control
We required all potential participants to have English as their first language, a minimum approval rate of 95%, and to be U.S. citizens (since they would need to be eligible
for jury duty). This gave us a set of 35,541 potential participants from Prolific’s pool
of 120,471.
We implemented a strict quality control process to determine our final participants, ultimately excluding 40 of the total 128 participants who completed our survey.
Participants’ survey response times varied greatly, from 8 minutes and 51 seconds at
the low end (of those accepted) to 2 hours and 30 minutes at the high end. We note
that some of this variability can likely be explained by the differing lengths of our
complaints, as well as participants’ level of familiarity with legal concepts. We suspect that those who complete mock jury studies frequently (which several participants
indicated to us by message), would be able to complete our survey more quickly.
Based on our piloting process (of 4 participants), we expected someone who carefully read our study to take up to an hour and a half to complete it, and initially
accounted for this amount of time in our budget. However, we soon noticed that many
participants were much faster than this. We then adjusted the expected time of our
survey slightly.
For participants who finished the survey in under 20 minutes, we manually calculated the amount of time it would take to read the survey in its entirety at various
reading speeds. Based on the results of Brysbaert (2019), we used 238 wpm as our
“average” reading speed, and 500 wpm as a very fast reading speed. We excluded
anyone who was completing the survey in less time than it would take to read it at
between 400 and 500 wpm.
Finally, we excluded any participants who sent us messages from whose messages
it was clear that English was not their first language ( n = 2).
H.1 Participant’s demographic data
In Table H1 we report the demographic data for the participants whose responses we
approved and included in the results of this study (and who consented to the sharing
of this information and for whom said data had not expired).
In Figure H1 we also include a map of our accepted participants’ locations.
Appendix I Survey Data
The data from our Prolific survey can be found here: https://osf.io/7xnmj?viewonly=
68c9693fa3994068b20d1be941b9db0b.

[PAGE 40]
Demographic marker Makeup of approved participants
Age
Participants aged 23-73
15% Under 30
38% Aged 30-39
20% Aged 40-49
13% Aged 50-59
9% Aged 60-69
5% Aged 70-73
Sex 37% Female
63% Male
Ethnicity
1% Asian
13% Black
9% Mixed race
5% Other
73% White
Country of birth
1% Ghana
1% New Zealand
1% Nigeria
1% South Africa
95% United States of America
Nationality 100% United States of America
Student status 11% Yes
89% No
Employment status
56% Full-time
20% Not in paid employment (e.g. homemaker, retired, or disabled)
11% Part-time
6% Unemployed (and job-seeking)
7% Other
T able H1 Study participants’ demographic data
Appendix J Data distribution
Table J2 reports the results of Shapiro-Wilk tests on our data, showing that the data
were not normally distributed.
Shapiro-Wilk ( p)
ChatGPT-authored Lawyer-authored
All cases 0.771 (< 0.001) 0.772 (< 0.001)
T able J2 Data distribution: juror confidence scores
Appendix K Concreteness scores

[PAGE 41]
Fig. H1 Accepted participants’ locations
Case Concreteness
Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al. 2.28
Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. 2.26
Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd. 2.43
Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase, et al. 2.32
Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. 2.25
Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al. 2.33
Ha v. Overstock.com, et al. 2.23
Brola v. Nano, et al. 2.35
Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al. 2.25
T able K3 Concreteness scores for ChatGPT-generated complaints
Case Concreteness
Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al. 2.20
Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. 2.22
Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd. 2.32
Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase, et al. 2.22
Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. 2.24
Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al. 2.28
Ha v. Overstock.com, et al. 2.23
Brola v. Nano, et al. 2.36
Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al. 2.20
T able K4 Concreteness scores for lawyer-generated complaints

[PAGE 42]
Case Concreteness
Lee, et al. v. Binance, et al. 2.29
Hong, et al. v. Block.One, et al. 2.35
Balestra v. Cloud With Me Ltd. 2.49
Underwood, et al. v. Coinbase, et al. 2.34
Audet, et al. v. Garza, et al. 2.32
Klingberg v. MGT Capital Investments Inc., et al. 2.49
Ha v. Overstock.com, et al. 2.25
Brola v. Nano, et al. 2.51
Davy v. Paragon Coin Inc., et al. 2.39
T able K5 Concreteness scores for Law360 articles

[PAGE 43]
References
(2014) Prolific. URL https://www.prolific.co
(2020) Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 48.
(n.d.a) Civil liabilities arising in connection with prospectuses and communications.
URL https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/15/77l
(n.d.b) Prohibitions relating to interstate commerce and the mails. URL https://www.
law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/15/77e
Ahmad Y, Wadhwa V, Funaki B, et al (2022) Outcomes of bellwether cases
related to inferior vena cava filters in multidistrict litigations. Journal of Vascular Surgery: Venous and Lymphatic Disorders 10(6):1378–1384. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jvsv.2022.05.005, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2213333X22002682
Allingham JU, Ren J, Dusenberry MW, et al (2023) A Simple Zero-shot Prompt
Weighting Technique to Improve Prompt Ensembling in Text-Image Models.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.06235, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06235,
arXiv:2302.06235 [cs, stat]
Archer R (2016) Cantor Fitzgerald Exec Named In Virtual Currency Ponzi Suit. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/807687/
cantor-fitzgerald-exec-named-in-virtual-currency-ponzi-suit
Blair-Stanek A, Holzenberger N, Van Durme B (2023) Can GPT-3 Perform Statutory Reasoning? https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.06100, URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2302.06100, arXiv:2302.06100 [cs]
Bommarito II M, Katz DM (2022) GPT Takes the Bar Exam. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2212.14402, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.14402, arXiv:2212.14402
[cs]
Bonsall S, Holzman E, Miller B (2019) Wearing Out the Watchdog: SEC Case Backlog and Investigation Likelihood. ScholarSpace URL http://hdl.handle.net/10125/
Brown T, Mann B, Ryder N, et al (2020) Language models are few-shot
learners. In: Larochelle H, Ranzato M, Hadsell R, et al (eds) Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol 33. Curran Associates, Inc.,
pp 1877–1901, URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2020/file/
1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf
Brysbaert M (2019) How many words do we read per minute? A review and metaanalysis of reading rate. Journal of Memory and Language 109:104047. https://

[PAGE 44]
doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2019.104047, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0749596X19300786
Brysbaert M, Warriner AB, Kuperman V (2014) Concreteness ratings for 40
thousand generally known English word lemmas. Behavior Research Methods
46(3):904–911. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-013-0403-5, URL https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13428-013-0403-5
Choi JH, Hickman KE, Monahan A, et al (2023) ChatGPT Goes to Law School. https:
//doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4335905, URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4335905
CoinMarketCap (2023) Cryptocurrency Prices, Charts And Market Capitalizations.
URL https://coinmarketcap.com/
Dalton DL (2013) Sector 10 Defendants’ Proposed Supplemental Jury Instructions.
URL https://www.westlaw.com/Document/Ief1a9790068211e4aca7d2889c73d40f/
View/FullText.html?transitionType=Default&contextData=(sc.Default)&VR=3.
0&RS=cblt1.0
Gale ME (1979) Legal Writing: The Impossible Takes a Little Longer Symposium
On Teaching Legal Writing. Albany Law Review 44(2):298–343. URL https://
heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/albany44&i=308
Guarnaccia M (2019) Rapper T.I. Faces 2nd ICO Suit, Parallel Suit
Names Kevin Hart. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1158676/
rapper-t-i-faces-2nd-ico-suit-parallel-suit-names-kevin-hart
Hadi MU, Tashi QA, Qureshi R, et al (2023) Large Language Models:
A Comprehensive Survey of its Applications, Challenges, Limitations,
and Future Prospects. https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.23589741.v2, URL
https://www.techrxiv.org/articles/preprint/A Survey on Large Language Models
Applications Challenges Limitations and Practical Usage/23589741/2
Holzman ER, Marshall NT, Schmidt BA (2023) When are firms on the hot
seat? An analysis of SEC investigation preferences. Journal of Accounting and
Economics p 101610. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacceco.2023.101610, URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165410123000344
Home Office (2023) Factsheet: cryptoassets technical. Tech.
rep., URL https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
economic-crime-and-corporate-transparency-bill-2022-factsheets/
fact-sheet-cryptoassets-technical
Innis CI (2022) Coinbase Is An Unregistered Securities Exchange,
Suit Says. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1473339/
coinbase-is-an-unregistered-securities-exchange-suit-says

[PAGE 45]
Iu KY, Wong VMY (2023) ChatGPT by OpenAI: The End of Litigation
Lawyers? https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4339839, URL https://papers.ssrn.com/
abstract=4339839
Jarvis S (2022) NBA-Highlight NFTs Count As Securities, Purchasers Say. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1545461/
nba-highlight-nfts-count-as-securities-purchasers-say
Kacperczyk M, Pagnotta ES (2024) Legal Risk and Insider Trading. The Journal of Finance 79(1):305–355. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13299, URL https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jofi.13299
Kahana E (2023) ChatGPT Is A Cool Trick, But AI Won’t Replace Lawyers. URL
https://www.law360.com/pulse/articles/1573178
Karadimitriou SM, Marshall E (n.d.) Mann-Whitney in SPSS. URL http://maths.
shu.ac.uk/mathshelp/Stats%20support%20resources/Resources/Nonparametric/
Comparing%20groups/Mann-Whitney/SPSS/stcp-marshall-MannWhitS.pdf
Kedia S, Rajgopal S (2011) Do the SEC’s enforcement preferences affect corporate misconduct? Journal of Accounting and Economics 51(3):259–278. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jacceco.2011.01.004, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0165410111000164
Klausner M, Hegland J, Goforth M (2013) When Are Securities Class Actions Dismissed, When Do They Settle, and For How Much? An Update. Professional
Liability Underwriting Society 26(4)
Kleinberg B, Vegt Ivd, Arntz A, et al (2019) Detecting deceptive communication
through linguistic concreteness. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/p3qjh, URL https:
//psyarxiv.com/p3qjh/
Kochman B (2018) Irish Cloud Coin Co. Breached US Securities Law, Suit Says. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1055323/
irish-cloud-coin-co-breached-us-securities-law-suit-says
Kojima T, Gu SS, Reid M, et al (2023) Large Language Models are Zero-Shot
Reasoners. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.11916, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2205.11916, arXiv:2205.11916 [cs]
Koroteev MV (2021) BERT: A Review of Applications in Natural Language Processing
and Understanding. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.11943, URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2103.11943, arXiv:2103.11943 [cs]
Legal Information Institute (n.d.a) Securities Act of 1933. URL https://www.law.
cornell.edu/wex/securities act of 1933

[PAGE 46]
Legal Information Institute (n.d.b) Securities Exchange Act of 1934. URL https://
www.law.cornell.edu/wex/securities exchange act of 1934
Lender DJ, Friedman JR, Barrow J, et al (2023) Class Action Fairness Act of 2005
(CAFA): Overview. URL https://us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/6-527-3431
Litera (2024) The Litera Ecosystem. URL https://www.litera.com/products/legal
Martin CE (2013) Plaintiff Securities and Exchange Commission’s Notice of
Filing Proposed Jury Instructions and Verdict Form. URL https://www.
westlaw.com/Document/Iab1f425e9c7711e2a160cacff148223f/View/FullText.html?
transitionType=Default&contextData=(sc.Default)&VR=3.0&RS=cblt1.0
Martinson S (2023) ChatGPT Mishap Attys ‘Truly Mortified,’ Ask
For No Sanctions. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1686237/
chatgpt-mishap-attys-truly-mortified-ask-for-no-sanctions
McRae M, Biondo HB, Richardson-Royer E (2023) Initial Stages of General Litigation:
Overview. URL https://us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/0-503-1906
Moffett TA (2022) CFTC & SEC: The Wild West of Cryptocurrency Regulation Comments. University of Richmond Law Review 57(2):i–762. URL https://heinonline.
org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/urich57&i=737
Nakamoto S (2008) Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System
Narayanan A (2018) Blockchains: Past, Present, and Future. In: Proceedings of the
37th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on Principles of Database Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, PODS ’18, p 193,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3196959.3197545, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3196959.
Narayanan A, Bonneau J, Felten E, et al (2016) Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency
Technologies
Nay JJ, Karamardian D, Lawsky SB, et al (2023) Large Language Models as Tax
Attorneys: A Case Study in Legal Capabilities Emergence. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2306.07075, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.07075, arXiv:2306.07075
[cs]
Newsham J (2018) $70M Weed Cryptocurrency Offering Was Illegal, Suit Says. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1007541/
70m-weed-cryptocurrency-offering-was-illegal-suit-says
Ninth Circuit Jury Instructions Committee (2023) Manual of Model Civil Jury Instructions for the District Courts of the Ninth Circuit. URL https://www.ce9.uscourts.
gov/jury-instructions/model-civil

[PAGE 47]
OpenAI (2023a) Api reference. URL https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/
fine-tuning
OpenAI (2023b) Fine-tuning. URL https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/
fine-tuning
OpenAI (2023c) Tokenizer. URL https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer
Perera K (2023) Identical Twins Defrauded $5M From 60 Clients,
SEC Claims. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1582312/
identical-twins-defrauded-5m-from-60-clients-sec-claims
Perlman AM (2022) The Implications of ChatGPT for Legal Services and Society.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4294197, URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=
Practical Law (2023) Federal Question Jurisdiction. URL https://us.practicallaw.
thomsonreuters.com/0-502-3299
Practical Law Litigation (2023a) Commencing a Federal Lawsuit: Drafting the
Complaint. URL https://us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/5-506-8600
Practical Law Litigation (2023b) Discovery Motions in Federal Court Toolkit. URL
https://us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/w-009-0479
Practical Law Litigation (2023c) Dispositive Motions in Federal Court Toolkit. URL
https://us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/w-009-0405
Practical Law Litigation (2023d) Motion Practice in Federal Courts: Overview. URL
https://us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/w-000-1571
Practical Law Litigation (2023e) Nondispositive Motions in Federal Court. URL https:
//us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/w-009-0422
Practical Law Securities Litigation & White Collar Crime (2023) Securities Litigation and Enforcement: Overview. URL https://us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.
com/w-009-8817
Ruscoe E (2019) ‘Erratic’ Overstock.com CEO Punished Short Sellers, Suit Says. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1203909/
erratic-overstock-com-ceo-punished-short-sellers-suit-says
Savelka J (2023) Unlocking Practical Applications in Legal Domain: Evaluation of
GPT for Zero-Shot Semantic Annotation of Legal Texts. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3594536.3595161, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.04417, arXiv:2305.04417 [cs]
Sinay R (2020a) Investors Accuse Crypto Firms Of Illicit
Token Sales. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1260569/

[PAGE 48]
investors-accuse-crypto-firms-of-illicit-token-sales
Sinay R (2020b) Investors Sue Block.one Over Unregistered
$4B ICO. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1274576/
investors-sue-block-one-over-unregistered-4b-ico
Stanford Law School, Cornerstone Research (2023) Securities Class Action Clearinghouse: Filings Database. URL https://securities.stanford.edu/current-trends.html#
collapse1
Stevens KL, Austin A, Wheeler D, et al (2022) The role of defendant gender on juror
decision-making within a mock sex trafficking case among a jury-eligible community sample. Journal of Sexual Aggression 28(2):218–230. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13552600.2021.1973127
Ting KM (2010) Precision and Recall. In: Sammut C, Webb GI (eds) Encyclopedia of
Machine Learning. Springer US, Boston, MA, p 781–781, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-0-387-30164-8 652, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-30164-8 652
Topal MO, Bas A, van Heerden I (2021) Exploring Transformers in Natural Language
Generation: GPT, BERT, and XLNet. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2102.08036,
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.08036, arXiv:2102.08036 [cs]
TRAC (2021) Securities and Commodities Exchange Litigation Reaches New High In
March 2021. Tech. rep., Syracuse University, URL https://trac.syr.edu/tracreports/
civil/645/
United States Courts (2022) Civil Cases. URL https://www.uscourts.gov/
about-federal-courts/types-cases/civil-cases
U.S. Department of Justice (2022) The Report of the Attorney General Pursuant to
Section 5(b)iii of Executive Order 14067: The Role of Law Enforcement in Detecting,
Investigating, and Prosecuting Criminal Activity Related to Digital Assets. Tech.
rep., Washington, D.C.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2017) Enforcement Manual
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2022) SEC Announces Enforcement
Results for FY22. URL https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2022-206
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2023) Crypto Assets and
Cyber Enforcement Actions. URL https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/
cybersecurity-enforcement-actions
Weinberger HP, Simon NC, Ettari SV, et al (2023) Civil Jury Trials (Federal). URL
https://us.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/w-020-5711

[PAGE 49]
Wichert B (2018) McAfee-Linked Bitcoin Biz Hit With PumpAnd-Dump Suit. URL https://www.law360.com/articles/1087372/
mcafee-linked-bitcoin-biz-hit-with-pump-and-dump-suit
Willmott D, Boduszek D, Debowska A, et al (2018) Introduction and validation of the
Juror Decision Scale (JDS): An empirical investigation of the Story Model. Journal
of Criminal Justice 57:26–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2018.03.004, URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0047235218300631
Yu F, Quartey L, Schilder F (2022) Legal Prompting: Teaching a Language Model
to Think Like a Lawyer. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.01326, URL http://
arxiv.org/abs/2212.01326, arXiv:2212.01326 [cs]
Zhao WX, Zhou K, Li J, et al (2023) A survey of large language models. 2303.18223