[PAGE 1]
CAN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS REPLACE HUMANS IN THE
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW PROCESS ? E VALUATING GPT-4’S
EFFICACY IN SCREENING AND EXTRACTING DATA FROM
PEER -REVIEWED AND GREY LITERATURE IN MULTIPLE
LANGUAGES
A PREPRINT
Qusai Khraisha
Trinity Centre for Global Health
School of Psychology
Trinity College Dublin
Ireland
khraishq@tcd.ie
Sophie Put
Department of Education
University of York
UK
Johanna Kappenberg
School of Psychology
Trinity College Dublin
Ireland
Azza Warraitch
Trinity Centre for Global Health
School of Psychology
Trinity College Dublin
Ireland
Kristin Hadfield
Trinity Centre for Global Health
School of Psychology
Trinity College Dublin
Ireland
October 30, 2023
ABSTRACT
Systematic reviews are vital for guiding practice, research, and policy, yet they are often slow and
labour-intensive. Large language models (LLMs) could offer a way to speed up and automate
systematic reviews, but their performance in such tasks has not been comprehensively evaluated
against humans, and no study has tested GPT-4, the biggest LLM so far. This pre-registered study
evaluates GPT-4’s capability in title/abstract screening, full-text review, and data extraction across
various literature types and languages using a ‘human-out-of-the-loop’ approach. Although GPT-4
had accuracy on par with human performance in most tasks, results were skewed by chance agreement
and dataset imbalance. After adjusting for these, there was a moderate level of performance for data
extraction, and – barring studies that used highly reliable prompts – screening performance levelled
at none to moderate for different stages and languages. When screening full-text literature using
highly reliable prompts, GPT-4’s performance was ‘almost perfect.’ Penalising GPT-4 for missing
key studies using highly reliable prompts improved its performance even more. Our findings indicate
that, currently, substantial caution should be used if LLMs are being used to conduct systematic
reviews, but suggest that, for certain systematic review tasks delivered under reliable prompts, LLMs
can rival human performance.
Keywords Systematic reviews, Large language models, LLMs, GPT, Artificial intelligence, AI, Natural Language
Processing, NLP, Machine learning
1 Introduction
Systematic reviews play a crucial role in advancing practice, research, and policy (Aromataris et al., 2015). However,
the current approach to systematic reviews is laborious and can be slow to the point that the resulting synthesis of
arXiv:2310.17526v2 [cs.CL] 27 Oct 2023

[PAGE 2]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
knowledge may no longer be up to date when it is completed (Borah et al., 2017; Michelson and Reuter, 2019). The
explosion of scientific literature, coupled with the complexity and specificity of many research questions, further adds to
these challenges (Fiorini et al., 2018). Artificial intelligence (AI) has emerged as a potential solution to these challenges,
with recent studies and evaluations suggesting its capability to enhance the quality and efficiency of systematic reviews
(Blaizot et al., 2022; Dijk et al., 2023; Kebede et al., 2023; Mahuli et al., 2023; Moreno-Garcia et al., 2023; Nugroho et
al., 2023; Santos et al., 2023).
Some examples of AI tools that have been used in systematic reviews include Rayyan and Abstracker, which help
with screening titles and abstracts (Giummarra et al., 2020; Rogers et al., 2020), trialStreamer, which helps with
data extraction from full-text articles (Marshall et al., 2020), and RobotReviewer, which helps with assessing study
quality and bias (Goldkuhle et al., 2018). The major shortcoming of these tools is that their performance significantly
deteriorates without looping in a human in the decision-making process, as shown by Blaizot and colleagues’ (2022)
meta-analysis. One possible reason for these limitations is that they split text into fixed segments, which has been argued
to hinder their ability to understand context, especially in longer texts (Guo et al., 2023). Newer large language models
(LLMs) based on the transformer technology (Vaswani et al., 2017), such as Generative Pre-Trained Transformer (GPT)
and Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT), may overcome this problem since they capture
more contextual information. This was demonstrated in a recent study, which highlighted GPT’s superior performance
on systematic review tasks compared to older AI methods (Syriani et al., 2023).
The question of whether AI tools can match or surpass human performance in conducting systematic reviews carries
profound implications for the future of scientific research. It holds the potential to radically transform knowledge
synthesis, turning systematic reviews from static literature summaries into dynamic, continually updated resources –
potentially altering the very way we approach science. Given these significant implications, it is crucial to acknowledge
the current uncertain state of AI in this domain, especially regarding the most substantial LLM model, GPT-4. This
model has been reported to significantly surpass all other LLMs, including previous versions of GPT, in various
natural language processing tasks across both English and other languages (OpenAI, 2023). Yet, as of now, nothing is
documented about GPT-4’s performance in conducting systematic reviews.
Research on using other LLMs in systematic reviews (mostly earlier versions of GPT) is not as comprehensive or
systematic as it could be, with much of the work containing contaminated datasets and inadequate metrics. No study,
for instance, has tested grey literature and non-English literature, which can constitute a large proportion of the evidence
base for some topics (Lawrence et al., 2014). Most studies focused on narrow aspects of systematic reviews, such
as Boolean queries (S. Wang et al., 2023) or only evaluating performance on titles and abstracts screening (Alshami
et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023; Syriani et al., 2023). Some have methodological shortcomings, such as Mahuli et al.,
(2023), who did not provide an objective evaluation of GPT’s performance, or Alshami et al., (2023), who did not
test GPT’s autonomous performance, instead relying on a ‘human-in-the-loop’ approach. A few may have included
contaminated data, such as Guo et al., (2023) and Syriani et al., (2023), who used datasets for systematic reviews that
published their results before or in 2021, when GPT was trained, which may bias the results in favour of GPT. Other
studies, such as Guo et al., (2023), did not consider imbalance nor incorporate chance agreement in their interpretation
of the results, thereby potentially inflating GPT’s accuracy. Syriani et al., (2023) addressed this issue but focused
on investigating GPT’s performance against other AI tools, not human reviewers. Our pre-registered study is the
first to evaluate GPT-4’s autonomous performance across several systematic review processes, including title/abstract
screening, full-text screening, and data extraction. It is also the first to test an LLM model in reviewing grey literature
and literature in other languages.
2 Methods
This study assessed GPT-4’s performance in screening and extracting data from documents for an ongoing systematic
review on parenting in protracted refugee situations. We used the ChatGPT interface to access the GPT-4 model between
May and September 2023. We tested documents that were reviewed using four inclusion/exclusion criteria: containing
empirical data, parenting behaviour, refugee status, and protracted refugee situation. Links to our GPT-4 prompts and
outputs, as well as the R code used for analysis, are on the Open Science Foundation (OSF) page (link). We registered
this study protocol on the OSF, while the details of the review can be found on both OSF (link) and PROSPERO
(Anonymised). We screened 300 titles/abstracts and 150 full-texts, as well as extracted data from 30 documents (see
Figures 1 and 2). Sample size was largely based on studies reviewed by at least two humans for screening, which was
the case for English language documents at all stages and those written in other languages in the title/abstract stage.
However, due to time and resource constraints, we only used one human reviewer for non-English studies at the full-text
level, and for data extraction from all studies. While we ensured a mix of decisions in terms of a random selection of
relevant and irrelevant studies written in English to gain deeper insight into inclusion performance, this was generally
not possible for non-English studies due to the large number of excluded studies.

[PAGE 3]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
2.1 Prompt engineering approach
We experimented with GPT-4 prompt formats for title/abstract screening. Initially, we tested citations alone, but GPT-4
appeared to focus mainly on titles, and its accuracy decreased with an increased volume of citations. To address this,
we presented complete abstracts in our prompts. Our next challenge was finding that GPT-4 struggled with complex
queries and large data volumes, prompting us to present inclusion/exclusion criteria separately and reduce the number
of titles/abstracts in each message. This approach seemed to reduce hallucinations, a frequently observed phenomenon
where an LLM confidently produces an inaccurate output (Beutel et al., 2023), but reduced consistency upon retesting.
Presenting criteria and text within the same message and lowering the number of studies based on the criterion’s
complexity improved consistency without increasing hallucinations.
We assessed test-retest reliability using 10 studies on each of our four criteria. Each criterion corresponds to a prompt.
We tested the four prompts five times and generated five decisions per criterion per study. We then recorded each
time GPT-4 output was inconsistent from the original answer. These scores were used to assess the impact of prompt
reliability on accuracy scores.
2.2 Screening and extraction
Each abstract batch (a maximum of three abstracts for the protracted concept – given that it contained a longer prompt –
and five abstracts for other concepts) underwent four chat tests based on inclusion/exclusion criteria. We tested multiple
abstracts within the same query to increase efficiency in screening. We proceeded to the next criterion in another chat if
GPT-4 responded ‘yes/maybe’. A ‘no’ meant exclusion from further review. If an abstract was excluded for not meeting
a criterion, we removed it and introduced a new one for subsequent tests, meaning that the number of abstracts remained
the same every time a criterion was tested. We set a five-message limit for titles/abstracts and three for full texts to
avoid GPT-4’s inaccuracies arising from too much information. Lengthy abstracts in grey literature were divided for
separate evaluations until GPT-4 finalised a decision. During grey literature screening, we modified the query to fit
source formats, switching “titles/abstracts” to “websites/reports” and “texts.”
For full text, we adjusted our queries, using “Include” instead of “Yes/maybe” and “Exclude” for “No”. Due to character
limits, we segmented texts. To reduce contamination of responses with each other, every time a text snippet was sent to
GPT-4, it was accompanied by the specific inclusion/exclusion criterion it was being tested against together within the
same prompt. If GPT-4 said “Include” for a segment, we viewed that criterion as met and began a new chat with the
next criterion from the first segment. An “Exclude” led us to present subsequent segments. If GPT-4 never indicated

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: and five abstracts for other concepts) underwent four chat tests based on inclusion/exclusion criteria. We tested multiple
Row 1: and five abstracts for other concepts) underwent four chat tests based on inclusion/exclusion criteria. We tested multiple: abstracts within the same query to increase efficiency in screening. We proceeded to the next criterion in another chat if
Row 2: and five abstracts for other concepts) underwent four chat tests based on inclusion/exclusion criteria. We tested multiple: GPT-4 responded ‘yes/maybe’. A ‘no’ meant exclusion from further review. If an abstract was excluded for not meeting
Row 3: and five abstracts for other concepts) underwent four chat tests based on inclusion/exclusion criteria. We tested multiple: a criterion, we removed it and introduced a new one for subsequent tests, meaning that the number of abstracts remained
Row 4: and five abstracts for other concepts) underwent four chat tests based on inclusion/exclusion criteria. We tested multiple: the same every time a criterion was tested. We set a five-message limit for titles/abstracts and three for full texts to
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
“Include” by the last segment, the study was marked as excluded, and no further criteria were tested. If humans had
already excluded a study, GPT-4 began screening with the humans’ exclusion reason. If GPT-4 shared the decision
made by humans, no further tests were needed. Otherwise, all remaining criteria were checked until we received an
exclusion decision. As a result, 72% of the English peer-reviewed literature needed testing on the ‘parenting’ and
‘protracted refugee situations’ prompt, compared to 44% and 18% for grey and non-English literature, respectively.
Extracted information mainly revolved around characteristics of parents (e.g., number of parents, gender, and education
distribution), characteristics of children (e.g., number of children, gender, and education distribution), study design (by
duration, data collection method and group allocation), sampling technique, and instruments used to measure parenting
(e.g., instrument type and name, target respondent and the main focus of the instrument). Only text from the methods
and results sections of the chosen papers were inputted into GPT-4. Similar to the above, we segmented the text into
pieces. Only the first response to a prompt was deemed final, except if the response was incomplete, then the subsequent
responses were also recorded as part of the answer.
2.3 Analysis metrics
We applied four metrics: True Positives (TP), True Negatives (TN), False Positives (FP), and False Negatives (FN). TP
and TN are the cases where GPT-4 agreed with human reviewers, meaning it made correct decisions. FP and FN are
the cases where GPT-4 disagreed with human reviewers, meaning it made wrong decisions. Ratios derived from these
metrics provide insight into the imbalance of the dataset by dividing true cases against false cases. A meta-analysis
indicated that systematic reviews’ datasets have between 40% to less than 1% of relevant studies, with an average of
3%. This suggests that imbalance scores of 3% are typical, while a score of 40% or less than 1% is ‘somewhat typical,’
and a score of above 40% is ‘atypical’ (Sampson et al., 2011).
Imbalance = T P + F P
T N + F N (1)
For GPT-4 performance, we calculated sensitivity, specificity and accuracy, which are commonly used metrics (e.g.,
Frömke et al., 2022; Patel et al., 2021). Sensitivity (also known as recall) shows how well GPT-4 identified positive
cases by taking (TP) and dividing them by the sum of TP and FN. Specificity indicates how well GPT-4 identified
negative cases by taking TN and dividing them by the sum of TN and FP. Accuracy, which evaluates the overall

[PAGE 5]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
correctness of GPT-4, was calculated by adding TP and TN and dividing by the total number of cases. There is no
consensus on how to interpret these scores, as they largely depend on the context (e.g., Shreffler and Huecker, 2023).
Previous studies have reported that human error rates in systematic review screening range from 5% to 20%, implying
that a score of 100% is ‘superior’ to humans, while an accuracy score of 80% to 95% for GPT-4 could be regarded as
‘on par’ (Wang et al., 2020). In the worst possible documented prediction, human error rates reached up to 40% (Wang
et al., 2020). This suggests that accuracy scores between 60% and 80% could be regarded as ‘near-par,’ and scores
below 60% could be regarded as ‘subpar’ to humans.
Sensitivity = T P
T P + F N (2)
Specificity = T N
T N + F P (3)
Accuracy = T P + T N
T P + T N + F P + F N (4)
Cohen’s Kappa (κ) was calculated to compare the actual and expected agreement between GPT-4 and human reviewers
(Cohen, 1960). This is important for systematic reviews, where inclusion is rare, and exclusion is common, which can
make humans and GPT-4 seem more agreeable than they are. The actual agreement (Po) is the proportion of cases
humans and GPT-4 gave the same rating, positive or negative. The expected agreement (Pe) is the probability that
humans and GPT-4 gave the same rating by chance, based on their rating frequencies. We subtracted the expected
agreement from the actual agreement and divided it by the maximum possible agreement (1 minus the expected
agreement). This gives a score between -1 and 1. We followed what McHugh (2012) suggested for the classification of
agreement scores, which are more stringent on interpreting values than those suggested by Cohen (1960): values .0 –
.20 as no agreement, .21 – .40 as minimal, .41 – .59 as weak, .60 –.79 as moderate, and 0.80 – .90 as almost perfect
agreement.
Cohen’s kappa has been shown to produce a false agreement rate in imbalanced datasets, so we used PABAK (prevalenceadjusted bias-adjusted kappa) to account kappa for the effects of prevalence and bias in the data set (Byrt et al., 1993).
PABAK corrects for this by accounting for the distribution of the categories in the denominator and by adjusting the
counts of agreements and disagreements in the formula. We also used weighted kappa to better capture the severity of
false rejections by GPT-4, which are the most serious errors it can make, because this would exclude a study which
meets the inclusion criteria. Weighted kappa (ωκ) assigns higher weights to greater disagreements, with 0 for complete
agreement. There is no standard test that can combine weights with PABAK, so we could not account for the effects of
data imbalance in the weighted Cohen’s kappa scores. Sampson et al. (2011) found that the median search precision
for systematic reviews is around 3%; that is, there are about 30 times more excluded studies than included ones. This
suggests a weight of 30 for false rejections in the calculation of weighted kappa.
κ = 1 − Pe
Po − Pe (5)
ωκ = 1 − 1 − Poω
1 − Peω (6)
PABAK = 1 − 0.5
2Po − 1 (7)
3 Results
In this study, we evaluated GPT-4’s performance in screening and extracting peer-reviewed, grey (non-peer reviewed),
and non-English literature. We first report on the reliability of answers when using the same prompt. This means that
GPT-4 gave the same answer every time, without any variation. For instance, if GPT-4 gave the same answer 10 times
in a row for the same text and prompt, it scored 100%, but if it gave the same initial answer only 7 times out of 10, it
scored 70%. GPT-4 performed best when assessing empirical data and refugees (100% reliability) and struggled with
the concepts of parenting behaviour (50% reliability) and protracted refugee situations (70% reliability). With these
findings in mind, we created a sub-literature sample that included only prompts relating to refugee status and empirical
data called the ‘high-reliability prompt group,’ given that these prompts had the highest reliability scores. Ultimately,
this sub-sample included 23 studies: a third were English peer-reviewed studies, a third were English grey literature
studies, and another third were non-English studies.

[PAGE 6]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
We subsequently looked at the balance of data, which is the ratio of relevant to irrelevant studies, for each literature
type, language, and stage (for the extraction stage, this means the presence or absence of data). Peer-reviewed studies in
English were fully balanced, as intended by our design, except in the extraction stage (.03; that is, 1 included for every
30 excluded). Unlike non-English studies (.05), the grey literature was fully balanced at the title/abstract stage, but
then both grey literature and non-English studies were skewed towards irrelevance in the full-text screening (.11 and
.09, respectively) and extraction stages (.24 and .20, respectively). It is important to note that while balance aids in
understanding all aspects of performance, it does not reflect the inherent imbalances in real-world datasets of systematic
review. Based on Sampson et al., (2011) finding that there are typically about 30 times more excluded studies than
included studies, our most imbalanced datasets were also the most consistent with other systematic reviews.
Across all stages and categories, the specificity was on par with human performance (>.80, except for English peerreviewed full-text screening), indicating a robust ability of GPT-4 to correctly identify irrelevant studies (Table 1). This
was especially true in literature containing non-English studies (>.90). Sensitivity, indicating how effectively GPT-4
identified relevant studies, was highest in the extraction stage for both peer-reviewed (English: .75) and grey literature
(.65), although note that for non-English studies the sensitivity was only .36 for data extraction. For non-English studies,
perfect sensitivity was achieved during the full-text stage. Accuracy was somewhat higher in the data extraction stage
than in the title/abstract screening phase, ranging between near-par and on par with human performance, except for the
English peer-reviewed literature.
The balanced dataset of English peer-reviewed literature had lower accuracy (title/abstract: .67, full-text: .69) than the
more unbalanced non-English literature dataset (title/abstract: .88, full-text: .96). In extraction, which was the only
time the dataset of English peer-reviewed literature was imbalanced, accuracy was the highest (.84). This suggests
that GPT-4’s high accuracy might be due to chance. Supporting this notion, the associated adjusted kappa scores were
low, ranging from ‘none’ to ‘moderate’ as categorised by McHugh (2012). An outlier in these scores was the ‘almost
perfect’ agreement seen in the highly-reliable prompt group, which exclusively featured responses from highly reliable
prompts (.91). When we weighted kappa to emphasise false rejections, in a way penalising GPT-4 for missing key
studies, scores for the highly reliable prompt group improved even more (.97).
4 Discussion
We found mixed results on the efficacy of GPT-4 as compared to human reviewers across various systematic review
tasks, languages, and literature types. GPT-4’s accuracy was influenced by chance agreement and dataset imbalance, and
when these factors were considered, GPT-4 often substantially underperformed humans. Yet, under specific conditions –
namely, when given entirely highly reliable prompts in full-text screening – GPT-4 demonstrated an ‘almost perfect’
performance on par with humans. While our findings indicate the need for caution in assuming uniform proficiency
across tasks, they also suggest that, under certain conditions, LLMs have the potential to revolutionise how we synthesise
knowledge.
Our results for sensitivity, and specificity are consistent with previous studies. For instance, Guo et al. (2023) and
Alshami et al. (2023) found that specificity was the strongest metric for title/abstract screening, as we did. They achieved
a specificity score close to ours (90% and 93%, respectively, vs our 92%). Their sensitivity score was slightly higher
than ours (76% and 84%, respectively, vs our 67%; although note that Alshami et al., 2023 used a human-in-the-loop
method). Our accuracy score for the peer-reviewed literature (67%) was lower than in previous work, possibly because
our study was the only one that artificially balanced its dataset. Unlike the others (Alshami et al., 2023; Guo et al.,
2023), we took this step because skewed datasets can make accuracy metrics unreliable, as later indicated by our low
adjusted kappa. Such a limitation will not be easily detected by anecdotal tests (Mahuli et al., 2023; Qureshi et al.,
2023) and may mislead general users who may assume that GPT is performing well when it is not. A possible reason
for this misconception is that GPT typically generates text that resembles human writing in terms of quality, style, and
content (Jakesch et al., 2023), thus misleading users to think that GPT has human-level abilities based on its human-like
outputs.
This study was the first to report on the novel application of an LLM in conducting full-text screening and extraction.
Automation techniques have been hailed as a way of increasing reproducibility (Ivimey-Cook et al., 2023). However,
previous endeavours employing AI tools for these tasks pinpointed several challenges. These included the need for
continuous human intervention in full-text screening (Beller et al., 2018), the necessity for extensive pre-screening of
training datasets (Halamoda-Kenzaoui et al., 2022), and the incapability to either review full-texts (Clark et al., 2020;
Nye et al., 2018) or to extract data deviating from a predetermined structure (Summerscales et al., 2011; Wallace et al.,
2016). Our findings indicate that GPT-4 has limited potential in full-text screening and data extraction, with moderate
performance in non-English and grey literature, and a very poor ability with English peer-reviewed texts. Its training
on publicly available data, which might lean more towards grey literature and non-English sources, could explain this

[PAGE 7]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
Table 1: Performance Evaluation of GPT-4 versus Human Reviewers in Screening and Extraction
Balance Sensitivity Specificity Accuracy Cohen Kappa ∗ Weighted Kappa Adjusted Kappa ∗∗
Title and abstract screening
English peer-reviewed 1 .42 .92 .67 .34 .23 .34
English grey 1 .48 .84 .66 .32 .24 .32
Other languages .05 .50 .89 .88 .21 .40 .75
Full text screening
English peer-reviewed .92 .38 .69 .54 .07 .05 .08
English grey .11 .60 .80 .78 .24 .44 .55
Other languages .09 1 .95 .96 -.10 -.11 .64
High-reliability prompt group
High-reliability prompt group .05 .36 .94 .85 .65 .97 .91
Data extraction
English peer-reviewed .03 .75 .84 .82 .54 .63 .63
English grey .24 .65 .85 .81 .45 .53 .62
Other languages .20 .36 .94 .85 .35 .29 .69
* The inter-rater reliability between human reviewers for the full-text data was a Cohen Kappa coefficient of .77. However, the review is not yet completed, so the
final value may vary slightly. The inter-rater reliability between human reviewers was calculated using data mostly from the peer-reviewed literature, but it also
includes a small portion of grey literature and non-English studies.
** The human reviewers achieved an adjusted Cohen Kappa of .89 for the same literature sample Cohen Kappa was calculated for above.
Note. We used PABAK (Prevalence-Adjusted Bias-Adjusted Kappa) to adjust Kappa for the effects of prevalence and bias in the data set (Byrt et al., 1993) and a
weight of 30 for false rejections in the calculation of weighted Kappa based on previous studies which have shown that the median search precision for systematic
reviews is around 3% (Sampson et al., 2011).

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Balance | Sensitivity | Specificity | Accuracy | Cohen Kappa∗ | Weighted Kappa | Adjusted Kappa∗∗
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Title and abstract screening | Balance: | Sensitivity: | Specificity: | Accuracy: | Cohen Kappa∗: | Weighted Kappa: | Adjusted Kappa∗∗:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: English peer-reviewed | Balance: 1.0 | Sensitivity: 0.42 | Specificity: 0.92 | Accuracy: 0.67 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.34 | Weighted Kappa: 0.23 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.34
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: English grey | Balance: 1.0 | Sensitivity: 0.48 | Specificity: 0.84 | Accuracy: 0.66 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.32 | Weighted Kappa: 0.24 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.32
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Other languages | Balance: 0.05 | Sensitivity: 0.5 | Specificity: 0.89 | Accuracy: 0.88 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.21 | Weighted Kappa: 0.4 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.75
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Full text screening | Balance: | Sensitivity: | Specificity: | Accuracy: | Cohen Kappa∗: | Weighted Kappa: | Adjusted Kappa∗∗:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: English peer-reviewed | Balance: 0.92 | Sensitivity: 0.38 | Specificity: 0.69 | Accuracy: 0.54 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.07 | Weighted Kappa: 0.05 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.08
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: English grey | Balance: 0.11 | Sensitivity: 0.6 | Specificity: 0.8 | Accuracy: 0.78 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.24 | Weighted Kappa: 0.44 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.55
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: Other languages | Balance: 0.09 | Sensitivity: 1.0 | Specificity: 0.95 | Accuracy: 0.96 | Cohen Kappa∗: -0.1 | Weighted Kappa: -0.11 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.64
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: High-reliability prompt group | Balance: | Sensitivity: | Specificity: | Accuracy: | Cohen Kappa∗: | Weighted Kappa: | Adjusted Kappa∗∗:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: High-reliability prompt group | Balance: 0.05 | Sensitivity: 0.36 | Specificity: 0.94 | Accuracy: 0.85 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.65 | Weighted Kappa: 0.97 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.91
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: Data extraction | Balance: | Sensitivity: | Specificity: | Accuracy: | Cohen Kappa∗: | Weighted Kappa: | Adjusted Kappa∗∗:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: English peer-reviewed | Balance: 0.03 | Sensitivity: 0.75 | Specificity: 0.84 | Accuracy: 0.82 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.54 | Weighted Kappa: 0.63 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.63
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: English grey | Balance: 0.24 | Sensitivity: 0.65 | Specificity: 0.85 | Accuracy: 0.81 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.45 | Weighted Kappa: 0.53 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.62
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: Other languages | Balance: 0.2 | Sensitivity: 0.36 | Specificity: 0.94 | Accuracy: 0.85 | Cohen Kappa∗: 0.35 | Weighted Kappa: 0.29 | Adjusted Kappa∗∗: 0.69
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
difference. However, we should note that the English peer-reviewed literature data had a very unusual balance of studies,
unlike the other databases, which are closer in their compositions to other systematic reviews, which suggests caution
against assuming generalisability. Lastly, GPT-4 performance was strongly influenced by prompt reliability, which
could itself be affected by word count and prompt complexity. Longer prompts, like those for parenting behaviour and
protracted refugee situations (around 400 words and 1600 words, respectively; the other two prompts were less than 300
words), may have lost important context due to their size. We also observe that the ‘parenting behaviour’ prompt might
have been most challenging for GPT-4 because the prompt was more open than specific (to capture non-traditional
ways of parenting), unlike all other ones, which contained exact definitions.
There are three main strengths and weaknesses to this study. First, despite our comprehensive approach covering
various literature types and our efforts to achieve balance, the challenges in balancing non-English texts and our very
attempts at balancing could have both introduced biases. Second, we used various metrics to measure GPT-4’s accuracy,
consistency, and agreement with human reviewers, but our relatively small sample size of evaluated papers might limit
the generalisability of GPT-4’s findings for other systematic reviews. Third, we registered and documented our research
protocol and analysis plan to ensure its validity and replicability but might have benefited from also creating a detailed
plan for prompt engineering in advance.
5 Conclusion
Over a hundred years ago, audiences worldwide were captivated by a horse named Hans, who, with a confident tap of
his hoof, appeared to solve mathematical problems. They believed Hans possessed an extraordinary cognitive ability,
almost human-like in nature. Yet, beneath this illusion lay a simpler truth: Hans was reading his handler. He picked up
on the faintest of cues – a twitch of a muscle, a barely noticeable nod, or even an unconscious sigh of anticipation. This
phenomenon mirrors the workings of LLMs like GPT-4. While not deciphering human cues per se, they are heavily
influenced by the prompts they receive, much like Hans needed clear guidance from his handler. But there is a key
distinction: whereas Hans required human guidance for his output, GPT-4 needs clear human input and generates
outputs autonomously. Our study underscores this, showing that when given a reliable prompt, GPT-4’s screening
performance rises to be almost perfect. In harnessing this potential, LLMs might pave the way for a transformative era
in systematic reviews.
References
Alshami, A., Elsayed, M., Ali, E., Eltoukhy, A. E. E., and Zayed, T. (2023). Harnessing the power of chatgpt
for automating systematic review process: Methodology, case study, limitations, and future directions. Systems,
11(7):351.
Aromataris, E., Fernandez, R., Godfrey, C. M., Holly, C., Khalil, H., and Tungpunkom, P. (2015). Summarizing
systematic reviews: Methodological development, conduct and reporting of an umbrella review approach. JBI
Evidence Implementation, 13(3):132.
Beller, E., Clark, J., Tsafnat, G., Adams, C., Diehl, H., Lund, H., Ouzzani, M., Thayer, K., Thomas, J., Turner, T., Xia,
J., Robinson, K., Glasziou, P., Adams, C., Ahtirschi, O., Beller, E., Clark, J., Christensen, R., Diehl, H., and et al.
(2018). Making progress with the automation of systematic reviews: Principles of the international collaboration for
the automation of systematic reviews (icasr). Systematic Reviews, 7(1):77.
Beutel, G., Geerits, E., and Kielstein, J. T. (2023). Artificial hallucination: Gpt on lsd? Critical Care, 27(1):148.
Blaizot, A., Veettil, S. K., Saidoung, P., Moreno-Garcia, C. F., Wiratunga, N., Aceves-Martins, M., Lai, N. M., and
Chaiyakunapruk, N. (2022). Using artificial intelligence methods for systematic review in health sciences: A
systematic review. Research Synthesis Methods, 13(3):353–362.
Borah, R., Brown, A. W., Capers, P. L., and Kaiser, K. A. (2017). Analysis of the time and workers needed to conduct
systematic reviews of medical interventions using data from the prospero registry. BMJ Open, 7(2):e012545.
Byrt, T., Bishop, J., and Carlin, J. B. (1993). Bias, prevalence and kappa. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology , 46(5):423–
429.
Clark, J., Glasziou, P., Del Mar, C., Bannach-Brown, A., Stehlik, P., and Scott, A. M. (2020). A full systematic review
was completed in 2 weeks using automation tools: A case study. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 121:81–90.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement ,
20(1):37–46.
Fiorini, N., Canese, K., Starchenko, G., Kireev, E., Kim, W., Miller, V ., Osipov, M., Kholodov, M., Ismagilov, R., Mohan,
S., Ostell, J., and Lu, Z. (2018). Best match: New relevance search for pubmed. PLOS Biology, 16(8):e2005343.

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: against assuming generalisability. Lastly, GPT-4 performance was strongly influenced by prompt reliability, which
Row 1: against assuming generalisability. Lastly, GPT-4 performance was strongly influenced by prompt reliability, which: could itself be affected by word count and prompt complexity. Longer prompts, like those for parenting behaviour and
Row 2: against assuming generalisability. Lastly, GPT-4 performance was strongly influenced by prompt reliability, which: protracted refugee situations (around 400 words and 1600 words, respectively; the other two prompts were less than 300
Row 3: against assuming generalisability. Lastly, GPT-4 performance was strongly influenced by prompt reliability, which: words), may have lost important context due to their size. We also observe that the ‘parenting behaviour’ prompt might
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
Fr
"omke, C., Kirstein, M., and Zapf, A. (2022). A semiparametric approach for meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy
studies with multiple cut-offs. Research Synthesis Methods, 13(5):612–621.
Giummarra, M. J., Lau, G., Grant, G., and Gabbe, B. J. (2020). A systematic review of the association between fault or
blame-related attributions and procedures after transport injury and health and work-related outcomes. Accident;
Analysis and Prevention, 135:105333.
Goldkuhle, M., Dimaki, M., Gartlehner, G., Monsef, I., Dahm, P., Glossmann, J.-P., Engert, A., von Tresckow, B., and
Skoetz, N. (2018). Nivolumab for adults with hodgkin’s lymphoma (a rapid review using the software robotreviewer).
The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , 7(7):CD012556.
Guo, E., Gupta, M., Deng, J., Park, Y .-J., Paget, M., and Naugler, C. (2023). Automated paper screening for clinical
reviews using large language models. arXiv:2305.00844.
Halamoda-Kenzaoui, B., Rolland, E., Piovesan, J., Puertas Gallardo, A., and Bremer-Hoffmann, S. (2022). Toxic effects
of nanomaterials for health applications: How automation can support a systematic review of the literature? Journal
of Applied Toxicology, 42(1):41–51.
Ivimey-Cook, E. R., Noble, D. W. A., Nakagawa, S., Lajeunesse, M. J., and Pick, J. L. (2023). Advice for improving
the reproducibility of data extraction in meta-analysis. Research Synthesis Methods.
Jakesch, M., Hancock, J. T., and Naaman, M. (2023). Human heuristics for ai-generated language are flawed.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 120(11):e2208839120.
Kebede, M. M., Le Cornet, C., and Fortner, R. T. (2023). In-depth evaluation of machine learning methods for
semi-automating article screening in a systematic review of mechanistic literature. Research Synthesis Methods,
14(2):156–172.
Lawrence, A., Houghton, J., Thomas, J., and Weldon, P. (2014). Where is the evidence? realising the value of grey
literature for public policy and practice, a discussion paper.
Mahuli, S. A., Rai, A., Mahuli, A. V ., and Kumar, A. (2023). Application chatgpt in conducting systematic reviews and
meta-analyses. British Dental Journal, 235(2):Article 2.
Marshall, I. J., Nye, B., Kuiper, J., Noel-Storr, A., Marshall, R., Maclean, R., Soboczenski, F., Nenkova, A., Thomas, J.,
and Wallace, B. C. (2020). Trialstreamer: A living, automatically updated database of clinical trial reports. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association , 27(12):1903–1912.
McHugh, M. L. (2012). Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochemia Medica, 22(3):276–282.
Michelson, M. and Reuter, K. (2019). The significant cost of systematic reviews and meta-analyses: A call for
greater involvement of machine learning to assess the promise of clinical trials. Contemporary Clinical Trials
Communications, 16:100443.
Moreno-Garcia, C. F., Jayne, C., Elyan, E., and Aceves-Martins, M. (2023). A novel application of machine learning
and zero-shot classification methods for automated abstract screening in systematic reviews. Decision Analytics
Journal, 6:100162.
Nugroho, P. A., Anna, N. E. V ., and Ismail, N. (2023). The shift in research trends related to artificial intelligence in
library repositories during the coronavirus pandemic. Library Hi Tech, ahead-of-print.
Nye, B., Li, J. J., Patel, R., Yang, Y ., Marshall, I., Nenkova, A., and Wallace, B. (2018). A corpus with multilevel annotations of patients, interventions and outcomes to support language processing for medical literature.
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 197–207.
OpenAI (2023). Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv:2303.08774.
Patel, A., Cooper, N., Freeman, S., and Sutton, A. (2021). Graphical enhancements to summary receiver operating
characteristic plots to facilitate the analysis and reporting of meta-analysis of diagnostic test accuracy data. Research
Synthesis Methods, 12(1):34–44.
Qureshi, R., Shaughnessy, D., Gill, K. A. R., Robinson, K. A., Li, T., and Agai, E. (2023). Are chatgpt and large
language models “the answer” to bringing us closer to systematic review automation? Systematic Reviews, 12(1):72.
Rogers, C. R., Matthews, P., Xu, L., Boucher, K., Riley, C., Huntington, M., Le Duc, N., Okuyemi, K. S., and Foster,
M. J. (2020). Interventions for increasing colorectal cancer screening uptake among african-american men: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS One, 15(9):e0238354.
Santos, Á. O. d., da Silva, E. S., Couto, L. M., Reis, G. V . L., and Belo, V . S. (2023). The use of artificial intelligence for
automating or semi-automating biomedical literature analyses: A scoping review. Journal of Biomedical Informatics ,
142:104389.

[PAGE 10]
Can large language models replace humans in the systematic review process? A PREPRINT
Shreffler, J. and Huecker, M. R. (2023). Diagnostic testing accuracy: Sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and
likelihood ratios. In StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing.
Summerscales, R. L., Argamon, S., Bai, S., Hupert, J., and Schwartz, A. (2011). Automatic summarization of results
from clinical trials. In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine , pages 372–377.
Syriani, E., David, I., and Kumar, G. (2023). Assessing the ability of chatgpt to screen articles for systematic reviews.
arXiv:2307.06464.
van Dijk, S. H. B., Brusse-Keizer, M. G. J., Bucsán, C. C., van der Palen, J., Doggen, C. J. M., and Lenferink, A. (2023).
Artificial intelligence in systematic reviews: Promising when appropriately used. BMJ Open, 13(7):e072254.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. (2017).
Attention is all you need.
Wallace, B. C., Kuiper, J., and Sharma, A. (2016). Extracting pico sentences from clinical trial reports using supervised
distant supervision.
Wang, S., Scells, H., Koopman, B., and Zuccon, G. (2023). Can chatgpt write a good boolean query for systematic
review literature search? arXiv:2302.03495.
Wang, Z., Nayfeh, T., Tetzlaff, J., O’Blenis, P., and Murad, M. H. (2020). Error rates of human reviewers during
abstract screening in systematic reviews. PLoS ONE, 15(1):e0227742.