[PAGE 1]
OceanGPT: A Large Language Model for Ocean Science Tasks
Zhen Bi1,2,5,6, Ningyu Zhang 1,2,5*, Yida Xue 1, Yixin Ou 1,
Daxiong Ji2,3 Guozhou Zheng2,4, Huajun Chen1,2*
1College Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University 2Donghai Laboratory
3Ocean College, Zhejiang University 4Zhoushan-Zhejiang University Ocean Research Center
5School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University,6Huzhou University
{bizhen_zju,zhangningyu,ouyixin,jidaxiong,guozhou,huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn
Project Website: http://oceangpt.zjukg.cn/
Abstract
Ocean science, which delves into the oceans
that are reservoirs of life and biodiversity, is of
great significance given that oceans cover over
70% of our planet’s surface. Recently, advances
in Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed the paradigm in science. Despite the
success in other domains, current LLMs often
fall short in catering to the needs of domain
experts like oceanographers, and the potential
of LLMs for ocean science is under-explored.
The intrinsic reasons are the immense and intricate nature of ocean data as well as the necessity for higher granularity and richness in
knowledge. To alleviate these issues, we introduce OCEAN GPT , the first-ever large language model in the ocean domain, which is
expert in various ocean science tasks. We also
propose DOINSTRUCT , a novel framework to
automatically obtain a large volume of ocean
domain instruction data, which generates instructions based on multi-agent collaboration.
Additionally, we construct the first oceanography benchmark, OCEAN BENCH , to evaluate the capabilities of LLMs in the ocean domain. Though comprehensive experiments,
OCEAN GPT not only shows a higher level of
knowledge expertise for oceans science tasks
but also gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities in ocean technology.
1 Introduction
Ocean science, which delves into the intricacies
of oceans that cover over 70% of our planet’s surface, is essential not only for understanding the rich
reservoirs of life and biodiversity but also for recognizing their pivotal role in regulating the global
climate and supporting economies (Esaias et al.,
1998; Falkowski, 2012; Visbeck, 2018; Jin et al.,
2023). Recently, advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Zha
et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023) have
*Corresponding author.
HowtolayasubmarinecableinthePacificOcean?LayingofSubmarineCable:10-StepProcedure.Theactualstepsvarydependingonfactorssuchaswaterdepth,geography,andspecificprojectrequirements. 1. Preparation 2. SiteSurveyandRouteSelection 3.EnvironmentalImpactAssessment 4. DesignandEngineeringPlanning 5.Selectionof…
WhatarethefisheryresourcesinSouth ChinaSea?Thefollowingspeciesofcommercialandrecreationalimportancecanbefoundamong ... southChinasea:tuna,mackerelsardinessquidcrabsshrimpslobstersoystershellfishpearlsetc.Inadditiontothesecommercially...Whydoestheestablishmentofmarinestandardizationcontributetothedevelopmentofthemarineindustry?Thecreationandimplementationofmaritimestandardscanhavenumerousbenefitsforbusinessesinthisfield,includingincreasedsafetyatsea,bettercommunicationbetweenvessels,improvedcargohandlingprocedures,moreefficientshipdesign,enhancedenvironmentalprotection,reducedcoststhroughstreamlinedoperations,enhancedglobalcoordinationamongregulatorybodies,promotionofbestpracticesacrosstheindustry,facilitationofinternationaltrade,assuranceofcompliancewithinternationallawsandtreaties,fosteringinnovationthroughresearchanddevelopmentincentives ....
OceanGPT
Figure 1: Capabilities of OCEAN GPT . Our proposed
model not only shows a higher level of knowledge expertise for oceans science tasks but also gains preliminary
embodied intelligence capabilities in ocean technology.
transformed the paradigm in science domains such
as medical science (Moor et al., 2023), molecular
science (Fang et al., 2023), protein science (Lin
et al., 2023) and geoscience (Deng et al., 2023).
However, the potential for the large language model
in ocean science is under-explored.
Despite remarkable success in general domain,
current LLMs still do not fully meet the specific
demand of oceanographers. This inadequacy is
primarily due to: (1) The immense volume and
intricate nature of ocean data. As ocean science
research progresses, acquiring data becomes increasingly challenging, which makes enhancing
the oceanic understanding both a golden opportunity and a significant hurdle. (2) The necessity for
higher granularity and richness in knowledge. Note
that the data requirements faced by researchers are
becoming increasingly intricate and diverse. Ocean
science encompasses various domains and subjects,
each with its distinct data attributes and patterns.
To alleviate these issues, we introduce
arXiv:2310.02031v8 [cs.CL] 3 Sep 2024

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: ognizing their pivotal role in regulating the global | nity and a significant hurdle. (2) The necessity for
Row 1: ognizing their pivotal role in regulating the global: climate and supporting economies (Esaias et al., | nity and a significant hurdle. (2) The necessity for: higher granularity and richness in knowledge. Note
Row 2: ognizing their pivotal role in regulating the global: 1998; Falkowski, 2012; Visbeck, 2018; Jin et al., | nity and a significant hurdle. (2) The necessity for: that the data requirements faced by researchers are
Row 3: ognizing their pivotal role in regulating the global: 2023). Recently, advances in Large Language Mod- | nity and a significant hurdle. (2) The necessity for: becoming increasingly intricate and diverse. Ocean
Row 4: ognizing their pivotal role in regulating the global: els (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Zha | nity and a significant hurdle. (2) The necessity for: science encompasses various domains and subjects,
Row 5: ognizing their pivotal role in regulating the global: et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023) have | nity and a significant hurdle. (2) The necessity for: each with its distinct data attributes and patterns.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
OCEAN GPT , the first-ever LLM in the ocean
domain, which is expert in various ocean science
tasks. Specifically, we propose DOINSTRUCT ,
an efficient ocean science instruction generation
framework that capitalizes on multi-agent collaboration. Each agent in our designed framework
is considered as an expert in a specific domain
(science and research, resources and development,
ecology and environment etc.) and is responsible
for generating the corresponding data. For the advancement of ocean science research using LLMs,
we also create a benchmark called OCEAN BENCH
to evaluate the capabilities in ocean science tasks.
Through extensive experiments, OCEAN GPT
shows superiority for diverse ocean science tasks.
Note that our benchmark data is based on criteria
manually evaluated by ocean experts, and can accurately reflect the capabilities that LLMs possess in
the field of ocean science. As depicted in Figure 1,
our model can comprehensively answer questions
according to the instructions of oceanographers,
which demonstrates its expertise in oceanography.
We further explore the potential of OCEAN GPT
from the perspectives of ocean engineering. Specifically, we integrate ocean robotics instructions into
the training data and evaluate its ability via code or
console commands. OCEAN GPT not only demonstrates a higher level of knowledge expertise but
also gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities in ocean technology.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce OCEAN GPT , the first ocean
LLM, which shows superiority for various
ocean science tasks. It can answer oceanographic questions according to the instructions
of oceanographers, demonstrating expertise in
oceanography.
• We propose DOINSTRUCT , an automated domain instruction evolving framework that constructs the ocean instruction dataset by multiagent collaboration. Our framework effectively alleviates the difficulty of obtaining
ocean domain data.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of OCEAN GPT in the OCEAN BENCH .
OCEAN GPT not only demonstrates a higher
level of knowledge expertise for oceans science tasks but also gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities.
2 Related Work
Large Language Models. The landscape of
LLM (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Touvron et al., 2023a,b) has rapidly evolved and
achieved a series breakthroughs. Rae et al. (2021);
Zhang et al. (2022); Thoppilan et al. (2022); Scao
et al. (2022); Zeng et al. (2023) have explored the
performance across a wide range of model scales
and broadened the application scope. (Qiao et al.,
2023a; Zhang et al., 2023a; Qiao et al., 2023b;
Wang et al., 2023a; Xi et al., 2023). RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) is a useful solution by incorporating knowledge from external
databases (Gao et al., 2023; Lewis et al., 2020;
Schick et al., 2023; Khandelwal et al., 2020). To
align LLMs, instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2023b; Ouyang et al., 2022; Taori
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023d; Chiang et al., 2023;
Xu et al., 2023) is a crucial technique to alignment
with user preferences and desired outputs. Different from those, we train a totally new ocean
science large language model and introduce an effective domain instruction generation framework
via multi-agent collaboration.
Science Large Language Models. LLMs have
emerged as cornerstone models in addressing challenges within scientific research. Singhal et al.
(2022) explores the potential of clinical LLMs and
introduces a human evaluation framework and instruction prompt tuning. Moor et al. (2023) proposes generalist medical AI that is capable of handling diverse medical tasks using self-supervised
learning on large datasets. Kraljevic et al. (2021)
introduces MedGPT, a model using EHR data and
Named Entity Recognition tools for predicting future medical events. BioGPT (Luo et al., 2022)
is a language model pre-trained on biomedical literature for improved text generation and mining.
Theodoris et al. (2023) describes Geneformer, a
model pre-trained on single-cell transcriptomes for
making predictions with limited data in network
biology. Lin et al. (2023) demonstrates the prediction of atomic-level protein structure from primary sequences using scaled-up language models.
Deng et al. (2023) introduces the first LLM specifically designed for geoscience, including its training
and benchmarking protocols. Chen et al. (2023)
presents tele-knowledge pre-training for fault analysis. Different from previous works, we design the
first large language model for ocean science tasks
and explore its potential for ocean research.

[PAGE 3]
3 O CEAN GPT
To obtain OCEAN GPT , we firstly construct the
training corpus for ocean science and pre-train an
ocean LLM based on LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al.,
2023b) in Section 3.1. Then we propose DOINSTRUCT , an automated framework for domain instruction generation to build an ocean domainspecific instruction dataset. Our framework leverages multi-agent collaboration and utilizes ocean
literature to automatically generate a large volume
of domain-specific instructions for ocean science
tasks (Section 3.2). The overview training procedure of our OCEAN GPT is shown in Figure 2.
3.1 Pre-training Stage
Ocean Corpus InstructionData
Fine-tuningEvaluationOceanBenchPre-trainingDataPre-training
Domain Instruction Data Generation
OceanGPT
Figure 2: Overall framework of OCEAN GPT .
To pre-train the foundation model for ocean
science tasks, it is essential to construct the pretraining corpus specific to ocean science. Therefore, we firstly collect a raw corpus of 67,633 documents from open-access literature. For the specific volumes we choose, we prefer to consider
publications from recent years to ensure the inclusion of the latest research and developments. At
the same time, we select some historically significant literature to help the LLM understand the
developmental history of the field. For diversity,
we choose articles from different sources to ensure
coverage of various research perspectives and methods. Specifically, we utilize the Python package
pdfminer to convert the content of literature files
into plain text. To ensure the quality and consistency of the data, further processing of the collected
dataset is necessary. We apply regular expressions
to filter out figures, tables, headers, footers, page
numbers, URLs and references. Additionally, any
extra spaces, line breaks, and other non-text characters are removed. The processed documents cover
various aspects of ocean science such as ocean
physics, ocean chemistry, ocean biology, geology,
hydrology, etc. It is important to note that special
characters, emoticons, and garbled characters are
also replaced or eliminated during this process. We
also employ hash-based methods to de-duplicate
the data, which helps reduce the risk of over-fitting
during pre-training and enhances its generalization
capability.
3.2 Domain Instruction Data Generation
As ocean science research deepens, researchers are
facing increasingly complex and diversified data
demands. Ocean science corpus contains multiple
fields and topics, and each topic has its unique data
characteristics and patterns. To effectively simulate and obtain those data, we propose a domain
instruction generation framework DOINSTRUCT to
obtain ocean instructions H by multi-agent collaboration. Each agent is considered as an expert in a
specific domain (topic) and is responsible for generating the corresponding data. It not only ensures
the professionalism and accuracy of the data but
also allows for the parallel and efficient generation
of a large amount of data. Note that the proposed
framework also has greater flexibility, allowing us
to independently optimize and adapt to different
science domains (e.g., astronomy).
Ocean Topic Definition. To provide researchers
with a clear and organized resources, we manually
categorize the data in ocean science into five major
ocean topics, which are based on the expertise of
experts in oceanography. The definitions of these
five topics comprehensively cover all the main areas of ocean science and are relatively independent.
The detailed explanation for the five major topics
is described as follows:
• Science and research focuses on the fundamental scientific theories and research related
to the ocean, such as ocean currents, sea temperatures and ocean biodiversity. This portion
of data separately helps drive the advancement
of pure scientific research and theories.
• Resources and development includes fisheries,
minerals, oil and gas, as well as other sustainable development resources. It is set for a
better examination and planning of the rational development of ocean resources.
• Ecology and environment. Environmental protection and ecological sustainability are currently global hot topics. It helps to address issues such as ocean pollution, ecological degradation, and the impact of climate change on
the oceans in a more focused manner.
• Technology and engineering encompasses aspects ranging from ocean measurements, ob-

[PAGE 4]
Expert - Engineer
Expert - Meteorologist
Expert - BiologistOceanAgents
Evolving Agent as Generator
Enrich and Refine
Instruction Seed Dataset
Fine-tuned Agent as Literature Extractor
OceanCorpus
High-qualityCandidates
Expert-annotated corpus
Retrieve𝑩𝑴𝟐𝟓(instruction, output)
(output, instruction)
Fine-tuning gpt-3.5-turbo
Extracting
Instructions
Ocean Instructions
Quality ControlAgent Debating
Robotics CodeSynthesizing
Iterative evolution
x
Agent as Inspectorrules as constraints
build pairs for training
Figure 3: Procedure of our proposed DOINSTRUCT . We use agents (gpt-3.5-turbo) as experts for each ocean topic
and make them rapidly expand the instructions by collaboration. In this framework, we design three agent roles:
evolving generator, fine-tuned literature extractor and inspector with rule constraints.
servational equipment, and ship engineering
to ocean energy development. Such categorization aids in a more focused exploration of
ocean engineering and technological needs,
while also facilitating interdisciplinary research with other engineering disciplines.
• Life, culture and others. The ocean is not only
a natural resource or a subject of scientific
research; it is also an integral part of culture
and lifestyle. This category consists of aspects
ranging from history and culture to the mutual influences between the ocean and human
societal activities, such as tourism, leisure.
While these five topics are distinct, there might
be some overlap as well. For instance, some issues
related to ocean environmental protection might
also be associated with the technology of ocean
engineering. For the sake of convenience in data
analysis, in the actual construction of the dataset,
we map each sample to the most relevant category.
Agents as Domain (Ocean) Experts. In Figure 3, we use agents as domain experts for each
ocean topic and make them rapidly expand the instructions by collaboration. We collect the seed
instruction data and propose three strategies by using multiple agents acting as experts.
To construct the seed dataset, we employ dozens
of annotators with rich backgrounds in marine science. Each annotator is responsible for several
topics and they first manually write some representative example for each marine topic. Then we
use LLMs to mimic the existing data to generate a
large number of similar samples. All samples are
ultimately manually checked by the annotators.
The entire process is very time-consuming, with all
the experts spending a total of four days to validate
the seed data. The final seed instruction dataset includes 5 major categories, over 500 sub-categories
and a total of more than 10,000 data samples.
• Evolving Agent as the Generator . We design an evolving approach that selects samples
from the seed dataset and simultaneously calls
upon two agents (gpt-3.5-turbo) to evolve the
selected samples. The evolution procedure includes two aspects: (1) we enrich the content
of the sample by having the agent automatically add relevant background knowledge to
it; (2) we guide the agent to refine the sample by conducting a more in-depth analysis of
specific concepts or entities. Through multiple rounds of iterative execution, our method
can rapidly expand the existing seed dataset,
which allows for the rapid expansion of both
the breadth and depth of information.
• Fine-Tuned Agent as the Literature Extractor. As shown in Figure 3, we collect a smaller
expert-annotated corpus and use the BM25
to retrieve high quality sentences in a larger
ocean corpus. We regard the retrieved texts
as high-quality candidate samples. Mean-

[PAGE 5]
Algorithm 1 Domain Instruction Data Generation
Require: Seed dataset S with format (inst, output), Ocean
literature corpus O, Pre-defined rules R for filtering
Ensure: High-quality instruction dataset H
1: Initialize empty datasets.
2: Step1Data = ∅, Step2Data = ∅, H = ∅
3:
▷ Agent Collaboration as Domain Experts.
4: for each sample in S do
5: inst, output ← sample
6: enriched_sample ← Enrich(inst, output)
7: ref ined_sample ← Ref ine(inst, output)
8: Step1Data ← Step1Data ∪ enriched_sample ∪
ref ined_sample
9: end for
10:
▷ Fine-Tuned Agent as Literature Extractor.
11: RetrievedT exts ← BM 25_Retrieve(O)
12: M odel M ← F ineT une(Sreverse )
13: for each document in RetrievedT exts do
14: output ← document.content
15: inst ← M (output)
16: Step2Data ← Step2Data ∪ (inst, output)
17: end for
18:
▷ Agent as Inspector with Rule Constraints.
19: M ergedData ←
Inspector (Step1Data, Step2Data, R)
20:
▷ Quality Control by Debating.
21: for each sample in MergedData do
22: inst, output ← sample
23: debate_result ← Debate(inst, output)
24: if debate_result is high-quality then
25: H ← H ∪ sample
26: end if
27: end for
28: return H
while, we fine-tune gpt-3.5-turbo with the
seed instruction dataset, regarding the finetuned agent as the literature extractor. In other
words, it can automatically extract instructions (inst) from the unannotated ocean science corpus (output). Therefore, we utilize
the agent to automatically build pairs of (inst,
output) on external ocean science literature.
• Agent as the Inspector with Rule Constraints.
For the massively generated instructions, we
use the pre-defined rules as constraints and
perform filtering on the data. These rules include syntactic and semantic constraints as
well as basic definitions in the ocean domain.
We describe these rules using natural language because many constraints and norms
related to ocean science cannot be directly
represented with expressions. Therefore, we
provide prompts to the gpt-3.5-turbo API as
demonstrations, letting it play the role of an
inspector. Our method ensures that the generated ocean instruction data is of higher quality.
Detailed prompt is shown in Table 5.
Finally, we assign two extragpt-3.5-turbo agents
as roles to debate the quality of data and obtain
high-quality instruction dataset. Our designed
framework can rapidly constructing a ocean science dataset using multi-agents, and by incorporating external knowledge from marine literature,
it overcomes the limitations inherent to the agents
themselves. Our framework can also be effectively
applied to the instruction data construction in other
scientific domains. It should be noted that we
separately synthesize robot instructions to equip
OCEAN GPT with the capability to interact with
the environment. The procedure is in Algorithm 1
and the statistics of dataset is in Figure 4.
0 40,000
Technology and EngineeringScience andResearchEcology and EnvironmentResources and DevelopmentLife, Culture andOthersSample numbers
Data-SeedData-EvolvingData-Extracting
Figure 4: Statistics of our final instruction dataset. We
use DOINSTRUCT to expand more than 150,000 instructions (data-evolving, data-extracting).
Quality Control for the Dateset. We ask domain
experts to carefully review and check data to ensure
quality. Specifically, the human volunteers are first
trained to make sure they have a comprehensive
understanding of the task. Then, we develop a platform that can help experts to randomly sample 10%
instances from the generated instruction dataset.
Next, the trained domain experts are asked to validate if there are potential errors in the sampled
instances. The final IAA (inter-annotator agreement) score for our dataset is 0.82, which satisfies
the research purpose.
4 Benchmarking Ocean Science Tasks
We provide detailed explanations of the experimental setup and the baseline models in Section 4.1. In
Section 4.2, we construct an ocean-specific benchmark OCEAN BENCH 1 to evaluate the capabilities
of our OCEAN GPT . We describe the automatic
and human evaluation in Section 4.2.
1https://huggingface.co/datasets/zjunlp/
OceanBench

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: 6: | enriched_sample← Enrich(inst, output) | rating external knowledge from marine literature,
Row 1: 6:: 7: | enriched_sample← Enrich(inst, output): refined_sample← Refine(inst, output) | rating external knowledge from marine literature,: it overcomes the limitations inherent to the agents
Row 2: 6:: 8: | enriched_sample← Enrich(inst, output): Step1Data← Step1Data ∪ enriched_sample ∪ | rating external knowledge from marine literature,:
Row 3: 6:: | enriched_sample← Enrich(inst, output): refined_sample | rating external knowledge from marine literature,: themselves. Our framework can also be effectively
Row 4: 6:: 9: | enriched_sample← Enrich(inst, output): end for | rating external knowledge from marine literature,: applied to the instruction data construction in other
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
4.1 Implementation Details and Baselines
For the pre-training stage, we pre-train our
OCEAN GPT 2 based on the LLaMA-2 (Touvron
et al., 2023b) for seven days with six A800 Nvidia
GPUs. For the instruction-tuning stage, we employ
the LoRA method (Hu et al., 2021) to fine-tune
the pre-trained model and choose three baseline
models for comparison. We use the chat version
of LLaMA-2 ( Llama-2-7b-chat-hf ) , which is a
generative language model optimized for dialogue
use cases. We also use Vicuna-1.5 (Chiang et al.,
2023), a chat model which fine-tunes LLaMA-2
on dataset collected from ShareGPT. We further
use ChatGLM2-6B, the optimized version of GLM
(Zeng et al., 2023). The detailed experimental settings are shown in Table 2 (Appendix A).
4.2 O CEAN BENCH
To evaluate the capabilities of LLMs for oceanography tasks, we design a benchmark called OCEAN BENCH . Our benchmark includes a total of 15
ocean-related tasks such as question-answering, extraction, and description. Our evaluation samples
are automatically generated from the seed dataset
and have undergone deduplication 3 and manual
verification by experts.
For the quality control, we further sample part of
data and ask domain experts to evaluate the quality
(those disagreed cases or bad cases will be manually fixed by domain experts.). The distribution
of our designed OCEAN BENCH and the detailed
statistics can be found in Table 1 and Figure 11.
Task Num Task Num
Analysis 674 Classification 895
Judgment 655 Letter Writing 359
Open-ended Generation 930 Extraction 1,078
Recommendation 1,089 Description 1,246
Summary 149 Editing 1,075
Identification 464 Transformation 401
Question Answering 1,230 Others 157
Commonsense Reasoning 1,024
Table 1: The detailed statistics of OCEAN BENCH .
Metrics. For the task-level calculation, we compare the effectiveness of two models for each task.
2We release the 7B version at https://huggingface.
co/zjunlp/OceanGPT-7B-v0.1 for evaluation, and
further release the 2B (MiniCPM-2B-sft-bf16)
and 8B (Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct) version at
https://huggingface.co/collections/zjunlp/
oceangpt-664cc106358fdd9f09aa5157.
3We also perform deduplication between the benchmark
and our training dataset to avoid the data leakage in the training stage of OceanGPT. The detailed explanation about the
similarity calculating deduplication method is in Appendix A.
When one model performs better on the majority
of test samples in a single task, it is considered to
’win’ that task. For the instance-level computation
process, we do not differentiate between specific
tasks and instead calculate overall metrics.
Automatic Evaluation. To evaluate the performance and reduce reliance on manual evaluation,
we leverage GPT-4 as the evaluator. Inspired by
Wang et al. (2023c,b), we utilize an effective calibration method to evaluate the performance of two
LLMs. For each testing question, we query the
GPT4 to obtain the comparison result when given
two outputs from two LLMs. We note that LLMs
are sensitive to the position of responses, so alleviating the positional bias is very important. To
balance the position bias, we exchange the order of
the responses to form the new prompt. The final
evaluating result is the sum of the test results for
the two prompts with their order swapped.
Human Evaluation. To validate our proposed
framework, we also collect the output data in different settings and evaluate it by human evaluation.
We employ 5 students with an ocean science background as human annotators. For each evaluation
setting, we sample a set of 200 examples and human annotators will rank the outputs they prefer.
The total expense is about 500 US dollars.
5 Results
5.1 Insights from Performance Results
OCEAN GPT can obtain better performance
than previous open-sourced LLMs. In Figure
5, we compare the performance of OCEAN GPT
with the three baseline models across 15 sub-tasks
at the task-level in the ocean domain. We utilize
both automatic and human evaluators, then compute the win rate (%) with baseline models. Compared to the baselines (llama2-chat-7b, vicuna-1.57b, chatglm2-6b), OCEAN GPT outperforms in the
majority of tasks, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
OCEAN GPT excels in a range of ocean science
tasks. As shown in Figure 6, we present detailed
automatic evaluation experimental results in the
OCEAN BENCH . It can be clearly seen that our
model is superior to baseline language models in
the vast majority of tasks. Note that previous opensourced LLMs even fail to handle several expertise
ocean tasks (e.g., Editing). While our designed

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: Task | Num | Task.1 | Num.1 | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: Task: | Num: | Task.1: | Num.1: | Unnamed: 0: than previous open-sourced LLMs. In Figure
Row 2: Task: Analysis | Num: 674 | Task.1: Classification | Num.1: 895 | Unnamed: 0:
Row 3: Task: | Num: | Task.1: | Num.1: | Unnamed: 0: 5, we compare the performance of OCEANGPT
Row 4: Task: Judgment | Num: 655 | Task.1: Letter Writing | Num.1: 359 | Unnamed: 0:
Row 5: Task: Open-ended Generation | Num: 930 | Task.1: Extraction | Num.1: 1,078 | Unnamed: 0: with the three baseline models across 15 sub-tasks
Row 6: Task: Recommendation | Num: 1,089 | Task.1: Description | Num.1: 1,246 | Unnamed: 0: at the task-level in the ocean domain. We utilize
Row 7: Task: Summary | Num: 149 | Task.1: Editing | Num.1: 1,075 | Unnamed: 0:
Row 8: Task: | Num: | Task.1: | Num.1: | Unnamed: 0: both automatic and human evaluators, then comRow 9: Task: Identification | Num: 464 | Task.1: Transformation | Num.1: 401 | Unnamed: 0:
Row 10: Task: Question Answering | Num: 1,230 | Task.1: Others | Num.1: 157 | Unnamed: 0: pute the win rate (%) with baseline models. ComRow 11: Task: Commonsense Reasoning | Num: 1,024 | Task.1: | Num.1: | Unnamed: 0: pared to the baselines (llama2-chat-7b, vicuna-1.5-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
Win rate (%)
WinTieLoss
020 80100
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6b
OceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7b
OceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Win rate (%)
WinTieLoss
020 80100
Win:12
Win:14
Win:15
Tie:3
Tie:1
Win:12
Win:13
Tie:2
Win:14
Loss:1
Tie:2
Tie:1
Figure 5: Ocean task-level results. Left: Automatic evaluation. Right: Human evaluation. Compared to baselines,
OCEAN GPT performs better than llama2-chat-7b, vicuna-1.5-7b and chatglm2-6b in both two settings. The
instance-level result is in Figure 10 (Appendix A).
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Question Anwsering
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Classification
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Open-ended Generation
Win rate (%)AnalysisWin rate (%)Commonsense ReasoningWin rate (%)RecommendationWin rate (%)EditingWinTieLoss
Description
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7bOceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7bOceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7bWinTieLoss
Figure 6: Evaluation results of OCEAN GPT in the ocean science tasks in OCEAN BENCH . The complete
experimental results are shown in Figure 12 (Appendix A).
Diversity
Score
1 ExpertiseQuality
Agent as GeneratorAgent as InspectorAgent as Extractor
Figure 7: Performance analysis for different agents. We
design three indicators to measure the generation effect.
multi-agent data generation framework can effectively act as experts in various subfields of the
ocean domain, which indicates that OCEAN GPT
is a better expert in various ocean domains.
DOINSTRUCT are the effective ocean data generators by multi-agent collaboration. As shown
in Figure 7, we design three indicators to measure
the data generation effect of our proposed method
from the perspectives of knowledge quality, expertise and diversity. We use manual evaluation
to calculate the scores of the three indicators from
1 to 5. The higher the score, the better the effect of
the testing model. It can be seen that the evolving
generator agent can effectively enhance the richness of ocean data. When the extraction agent is
at work, the expertise of the content is greatly improved. At the same time, the inspector agent plays
a significant role in enhancing the quality of the
generated data. It shows that multi-agent collaboration is effective for ocean instruction generation.
5.2 Exploring the Potential of OceanGPT
In this section, we explore the potential of
OCEAN GPT from the perspectives of ocean science and ocean engineering. For ocean science
(Section 5.2.1), we focus on the key scientific issues of nuclear pollution in the ocean environment.
For ocean engineering (Section 5.2.2), we explore
the potential in robotics applications (Li et al.,
2023). Specifically, we use Gazebo 4 as the simulator (Manhães et al., 2016) to test OCEAN GPT’s
ability to control underwater robots.
5.2.1 OceanGPT for Ocean Science
In Figure 8, we compare the outputs of
OCEAN GPT and vicuna-1.5-7b. It shows that
OCEAN GPT shows a higher level of knowledge
expertise when describing the content of radioactive nuclide research. Its textual content is not
only clear in structure and well-organized, but also
covers various aspects of radioactive nuclide research, from experimental design to data analysis,
and then to risk assessment and disposal guidelines.
4https://github.com/uuvsimulator/uuv_simulator

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Win | Tie | Loss | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Win.1 | Tie Loss | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: OceanGPT | Win: | Tie: | Loss: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Win.1: | Tie Loss: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Win: | Tie: Win:12 | Loss: | Unnamed: 1: Tie:3 | Unnamed: 2: | Win.1: | Tie Loss: Win:12 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: Tie:2 | Unnamed: 5: Loss:1
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: OceanGPT | Win: | Tie: | Loss: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Win.1: | Tie Loss: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Win: | Tie: | Loss: Win:14 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: Tie:1 | Win.1: | Tie Loss: Win:13 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: Tie:2
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: vs llama2-chat-7b | Win: | Tie: | Loss: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Win.1: | Tie Loss: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: OceanGPT | Win: | Tie: | Loss: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Win.1: | Tie Loss: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Win: | Tie: | Loss: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Win.1: | Tie Loss: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: Tie:1
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: vs chatglm2-6b | Win: | Tie: | Loss: Win:15 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Win.1: | Tie Loss: Win:14 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=2]
Columns: 90 | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | 90.1 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | 90.2 | Unnamed: 6 | Unnamed: 7 | Unnamed: 8 | 90.3
Row 1: 90: 60.0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | 90.1: 60.0 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 90.2: 60.0 | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3: 60.0
Row 2: 90: 30.0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | 90.1: 30.0 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 90.2: 30.0 | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3: 30.0
Row 3: 90: | Unnamed: 0: OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: OceanGPT | 90.1: | Unnamed: 3: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 4: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 5: OceanGPT | 90.2: | Unnamed: 6: OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 7: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3:
Row 4: 90: | Unnamed: 0: vs vicuna-1.5-7b vs llama2-chat-7b | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: vs chatglm2-6b | 90.1: | Unnamed: 3: vs chatglm2-6b | Unnamed: 4: vs llama2-chat-7b | Unnamed: 5: vs vicuna-1.5-7b | 90.2: | Unnamed: 6: vs chatglm2-6b vs llama2-chat-7b | Unnamed: 7: vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3:
Row 5: 90: | Unnamed: 0: Win Tie Loss | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | 90.1: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 90.2: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3:
Row 6: 90: | Unnamed: 0: Question Anwsering | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | 90.1: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: Classification | Unnamed: 5: | 90.2: | Unnamed: 6: Open-ended Generation | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3:
Row 7: 90: 90.0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | 90.1: 90.0 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 90.2: 90.0 | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3: 90.0
Row 8: 90: 60.0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | 90.1: 60.0 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 90.2: 60.0 | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3: 60.0
Row 9: 90: 30.0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | 90.1: 30.0 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 90.2: 30.0 | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | 90.3: 30.0
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
Conductingresearchoninterfacialchemistryandtoxicologicaleffectsofkeyradioactivenuclidesrequiresamultidisciplinaryapproach,combiningexpertiseinchemistry,physics,biology,andenvironmentalscience.Herearesomegeneralstepsyoucanfollowtoconductresearchinthisarea:1. Identifythekeyradioactivenuclidesofinterest… 2. Developaresearchquestion… 3. Designexperiments:Developasetofexperimentsthatwillhelpyouansweryourresearchquestion.Thismayinvolveconductinglaboratoryexperiments,fieldstudies,orboth.Besuretochooseexperimentsthatareappropriateforyourresearchquestionandthatusemethodsthatarereliableandvalid. 4. Collectandanalyzedata… 5. Interpretresultsanddrawconclusions:Useyourdatatodrawconclusionsabouttheinterfacialchemistryandtoxicologicaleffectsofthekeyradioactivenuclides.Besuretoconsideranylimitationsofyourstudyandtoconsiderhowyourfindingsmaybegeneralizedtoothercontexts.6. Communicateyourresults:Finally,shareyourfindingswithothersthroughpublicationinacademicjournals,presentationsatconferences,andothermeans.Besuretoclearlycommunicatetheimportanceofyourworkanditsimplications...
Thestudyofinterfacialchemistryandtoxicologicaleffectsofkeyradioactivenuclidesisacomplexresearchfieldthatrequiresamultidisciplinaryapproach.Itinvolvesmultipletechniquessuchasexperimentalresearch,theoreticalresearch,andnumericalsimulations.Thefollowingisadetailedoutlineofthestepstoconductresearchontheinterfacechemistryandtoxicologicaleffectsofkeyradioactivenuclides:1.Determinethespecificradioactivenuclidesofinterest…2.Conductlaboratoryexperiments … 3.Developcomputationalmodels:Computationalmodelscanbeusedtosimulatethechemicalandtoxicologicaleffectsofradioactivenuclides.... 4.Analyzeexperimentaldata…5.Developtoxicologicalriskassessmentmethods:Toxicologicalriskassessmentmethodsareusedtoevaluatethepotentialhazardsofradioactivenuclides.Thisinvolvesdevelopingmodelsthatcanpredictthetoxicologicaleffectsofradioactivenuclidesandassessingtheirriskstohumanhealth. 6.Conductfieldexperiments:...7.Developguidelinesforsafedisposal:Safedisposalofradioactivenuclidesiscriticalforpreventingenvironmentalcontaminationandprotectinghumanhealth.Thisinvolves...
OceanGPT
Vicuna-7b-1.5
Figure 8: Case analysis on ocean science task. We use blue font to represent the difference and the instruction is:
How to conduct research on interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key radioactive nuclides?
Target Object
𝒗
Start Point
`roslaunch uuv_control_utils start_helical_trajectory.launch uuv_name:=rexrov n_turns:=2`
Command for Robot
OceanGPT
Figure 9: Our model can be instructed for underwater robot control in the simulation platform of Gazebo which
shows OCEAN GPT gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities.
In contrast, although vicuna-1.5-7b has clear expression and logicality, it lacks depth and specific
content related to radioactive nuclides. Overall,
OCEAN GPT has advantages in terms of knowledge expertise, quality, and richness. The complete
outputs are shown in the Table 6.
5.2.2 OceanGPT for Ocean Engineering
Ocean engineering focuses on the design, development, and management of structures and systems
within the ocean environment. It plays an indispensable role in harnessing the vast potential of the
oceans while ensuring sustainable and secure maritime operations. To facilitate interaction between
OCEAN GPT and the external world, we synthesize robotic code data and integrate those machine
code instructions into the training data.
As depicted in Figure 9, OCEAN GPT can instruct underwater robots via code or console commands, allowing them to execute basic path-finding
operations. In this example, by using programming
language as a prompt, our OCEAN GPT can automatically generate code (the robot generate a double helix path) for underwater robot to operate complex tasks (based on human instructions). In fact,
the experimental result suggests that OCEAN GPT
has the potential to acquire embodied intelligence.
Though we make preliminary attempts for ocean
robot interaction, it paves the way for advanced
oceanic models to undertake intricate robotic control and complex planning tasks.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce OCEAN GPT, the firstever oceanographic pre-trained language model,
which is expert in various ocean science tasks.
To alleviate the difficulties for obtaining ocean
data, we propose an domain construction framework called DOINSTRUCT , which constructs the
ocean instruction dataset by multi-agent collaboration. Each agent in our designed framework is
considered as an expert in a specific topic and is
responsible for generating the corresponding data.
Our generated dataset consists of diverse instructions to align the desired behaviors in ocean science issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we
observe that OCEAN GPT not only demonstrates
a higher level of knowledge expertise for oceans
science tasks but also gains preliminary embodied
intelligence capabilities in ocean engineering. We
will continue to improve OCEAN GPT by training on larger corpus with larger models (e.g., 30B,
70B) and maintain OCEAN BENCH by adding new
data and tasks.

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: struct underwater robots via code or console com- | ence issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we
Row 1: struct underwater robots via code or console com-: mands, allowing them to execute basic path-finding | ence issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we: observe that OCEANGPT not only demonstrates
Row 2: struct underwater robots via code or console com-: operations. In this example, by using programming | ence issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we: a higher level of knowledge expertise for oceans
Row 3: struct underwater robots via code or console com-: language as a prompt, our OCEANGPT can auto- | ence issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we: science tasks but also gains preliminary embodied
Row 4: struct underwater robots via code or console com-: matically generate code (the robot generate a dou- | ence issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we: intelligence capabilities in ocean engineering. We
Row 5: struct underwater robots via code or console com-: ble helix path) for underwater robot to operate com- | ence issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we: will continue to improve OCEANGPT by trainRow 6: struct underwater robots via code or console com-: plex tasks (based on human instructions). In fact, | ence issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we: ing on larger corpus with larger models (e.g., 30B,
Row 7: struct underwater robots via code or console com-: the experimental result suggests that OCEANGPT | ence issues. Though comprehensive analysis, we: 70B) and maintain OCEANBENCH by adding new
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
Limitations
Bias in Data Distribution In the realm of LLMs,
the distribution of pre-training data and instruction
data can be subject to substantial biases, which can
shape the outputs of these models. Pre-training
data for LLMs often comes from the internet, a
vast and potentially biased source of information.
The Internet content is inherently skewed, reflecting the biases of its contributors, and hence may
not represent a balanced global perspective. Similarly, instruction data can also carry the biases of
the humans who create these instructions. For instance, instruction developed by individuals with a
particular cultural, socioeconomic, or educational
background may inadvertently favor specific perspectives, languages, or communication styles and
marginalize others. This bias in data distribution
can result in models that reinforce existing prejudices, lack cultural sensitivity, or fail to accurately understand and generate content in underrepresented languages or dialects.
Hallucination in LLMs Although LLMs have
shown tremendous success in general domains of
NLP, there is a notable issue regarding their tendency to produce hallucinations. Hallucinations refer to instances where LLMs occasionally generate
content that deviates from the user’s input, contradicts previously generated context, or conflicts with
established world knowledge. By developing strategies to address the issue of hallucination, LLMs can
better align their outputs with user intent, preserve
coherence within generated content, and enhance
their overall utility in real-world applications.
Acknowledgments
We would like to express gratitude to the anonymous reviewers for constructive comments. This
work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 62206246,
No. NSFCU23B2055, No. NSFCU19B2027),
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities (226-2023-00138), Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
LGG22F030011), Yongjiang Talent Introduction
Programme (2021A-156-G), CCF-Baidu Open
Fund, the “Pioneer and Leader + X” Plan Project
of Zhejiang Province under Grant (2024C01162),
and Information Technology Center and State Key
Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University.
References
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
2020, virtual.
Zhuo Chen, Wen Zhang, Yufeng Huang, Mingyang
Chen, Yuxia Geng, Hongtao Yu, Zhen Bi, Yichi
Zhang, Zhen Yao, Wenting Song, Xinliang Wu,
Yi Yang, Mingyi Chen, Zhaoyang Lian, Yingying Li,
Lei Cheng, and Huajun Chen. 2023. Tele-knowledge
pre-training for fault analysis.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng,
Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion
Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. 2023. Vicuna: An opensource chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt
quality.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi,
Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek
Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, and et al. 2022.
Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
CoRR, abs/2204.02311.
Cheng Deng, Tianhang Zhang, Zhongmou He, Qiyuan
Chen, Yuanyuan Shi, Le Zhou, Luoyi Fu, Weinan
Zhang, Xinbing Wang, Chenghu Zhou, Zhouhan Lin,
and Junxian He. 2023. Learning A foundation language model for geoscience knowledge understanding and utilization. CoRR, abs/2306.05064.
Wayne E Esaias, Mark R Abbott, Ian Barton, Otis B
Brown, Janet W Campbell, Kendall L Carder, Dennis K Clark, Robert H Evans, Frank E Hoge,
Howard R Gordon, et al. 1998. An overview of
modis capabilities for ocean science observations.
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 36(4):1250–1265.
Paul Falkowski. 2012. Ocean science: the power of
plankton. Nature, 483(7387):S17–S20.
Yin Fang, Qiang Zhang, Ningyu Zhang, Zhuo Chen,
Xiang Zhuang, Xin Shao, Xiaohui Fan, and Huajun
Chen. 2023. Knowledge graph-enhanced molecular
contrastive learning with functional prompt. Nature
Machine Intelligence, 5:1–12.

[PAGE 10]
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia,
Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Qianyu Guo,
Meng Wang, and Haofen Wang. 2023. Retrievalaugmented generation for large language models: A
survey. CoRR, abs/2312.10997.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan
Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and
Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of
large language models.
Jinhao Jiang, Kun Zhou, Zican Dong, Keming Ye,
Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. Structgpt:
A general framework for large language model to
reason over structured data. CoRR, abs/2305.09645.
Xuchen Jin, Xianqiang He, Difeng Wang, Jianyun Ying,
Fang Gong, Qiankun Zhu, Chenghu Zhou, and Delu
Pan. 2023. Impact of rain effects on l-band passive microwave satellite observations over the ocean.
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote. Sens., 61:1–16.
Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2020. Generalization
through memorization: Nearest neighbor language
models. In 8th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net.
Zeljko Kraljevic, Anthony Shek, Daniel Bean, Rebecca
Bendayan, James T. Teo, and Richard J. B. Dobson.
2021. Medgpt: Medical concept prediction from
clinical narratives. CoRR, abs/2107.03134.
Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih,
Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for
knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual.
Chengshu Li, Jacky Liang, Andy Zeng, Xinyun Chen,
Karol Hausman, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Li FeiFei, Fei Xia, and Brian Ichter. 2023. Chain of code:
Reasoning with a language model-augmented code
emulator.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie,
Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin, Robert
Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, Allan dos
Santos Costa, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom Sercu,
Salvatore Candido, and Alexander Rives. 2023.
Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a language model. Science,
379(6637):1123–1130.
Renqian Luo, Liai Sun, Yingce Xia, Tao Qin, Sheng
Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2022.
Biogpt: generative pre-trained transformer for
biomedical text generation and mining. Briefings
Bioinform., 23(6).
Musa Morena Marcusso Manhães, Sebastian A. Scherer,
Martin V oss, Luiz Ricardo Douat, and Thomas
Rauschenbach. 2016. UUV simulator: A gazebobased package for underwater intervention and multirobot simulation. In OCEANS 2016 MTS/IEEE Monterey. IEEE.
Michael Moor, Oishi Banerjee, Zahra Shakeri, Harlan
Krumholz, Jure Leskovec, Eric Topol, and Pranav
Rajpurkar. 2023. Foundation models for generalist
medical artificial intelligence. Nature, 616:259–265.
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray,
John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke
Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe.
2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In NeurIPS.
Shuofei Qiao, Honghao Gui, Huajun Chen, and Ningyu
Zhang. 2023a. Making language models better
tool learners with execution feedback. CoRR,
abs/2305.13068.
Shuofei Qiao, Yixin Ou, Ningyu Zhang, Xiang Chen,
Yunzhi Yao, Shumin Deng, Chuanqi Tan, Fei Huang,
and Huajun Chen. 2023b. Reasoning with language
model prompting: A survey. In Proceedings of the
61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL
2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pages 5368–
5393. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie
Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, H. Francis Song, John
Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan, Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George
van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron Huang,
Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia
Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu, Erich Elsen, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine
Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena
Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou,
Arthur Mensch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux, Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong,
Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Yujia
Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin,
Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Chris
Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew J. Johnson, Blake A.
Hechtman, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William
Isaac, Edward Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura
Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub,
Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. 2021. Scaling
language models: Methods, analysis & insights from
training gopher. CoRR, abs/2112.11446.

[PAGE 11]
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilic, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon,
Matthias Gallé, Jonathan Tow, Alexander M. Rush,
Stella Biderman, Albert Webson, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Thomas Wang, Benoît Sagot, Niklas
Muennighoff, Albert Villanova del Moral, Olatunji
Ruwase, Rachel Bawden, Stas Bekman, Angelina
McMillan-Major, Iz Beltagy, Huu Nguyen, Lucile
Saulnier, Samson Tan, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Victor Sanh, Hugo Laurençon, Yacine Jernite, Julien
Launay, Margaret Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Aaron
Gokaslan, Adi Simhi, Aitor Soroa, Alham Fikri
Aji, Amit Alfassy, Anna Rogers, Ariel Kreisberg
Nitzav, Canwen Xu, Chenghao Mou, Chris Emezue,
Christopher Klamm, Colin Leong, Daniel van Strien,
David Ifeoluwa Adelani, and et al. 2022. BLOOM:
A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language
model. CoRR, abs/2211.05100.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta
Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola
Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer:
Language models can teach themselves to use tools.
CoRR, abs/2302.04761.
Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S. Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales,
Ajay Kumar Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen
Pfohl, Perry Payne, Martin Seneviratne, Paul Gamble,
Chris Kelly, Nathaneal Schärli, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Philip Andrew Mansfield, Blaise Agüera y Arcas,
Dale R. Webster, Gregory S. Corrado, Yossi Matias,
Katherine Chou, Juraj Gottweis, Nenad Tomasev,
Yun Liu, Alvin Rajkomar, Joelle K. Barral, Christopher Semturs, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Vivek
Natarajan. 2022. Large language models encode
clinical knowledge. CoRR, abs/2212.13138.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann
Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang,
and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2023. Stanford alpaca:
An instruction-following llama model. https://
github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca.
Christina Theodoris, Ling Xiao, Anant Chopra, Mark
Chaffin, Zeina Sayed, Matthew Hill, Helene Mantineo, Elizabeth Brydon, Zexian Zeng, Shirley Liu,
and Patrick Ellinor. 2023. Transfer learning enables
predictions in network biology. Nature, 618:1–9.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall,
Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du,
YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven Zheng,
Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang,
Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao
Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts,
Maarten Bosma, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang,
Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Kathleen S.
Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee
Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora
Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew
Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Agüera
y Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed H. Chi, and
Quoc Le. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog
applications. CoRR, abs/2201.08239.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023a. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models. CoRR,
abs/2302.13971.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian CantonFerrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, and et al. 2023b. Llama 2:
Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. CoRR,
abs/2307.09288.
Martin Visbeck. 2018. Ocean science research is key
for a sustainable future. Nature communications,
9(1):690.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao
Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang,
Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei
Wei, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023a. A survey on large
language model based autonomous agents. CoRR,
abs/2308.11432.
Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Zefan Cai, Dawei Zhu,
Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and
Zhifang Sui. 2023b. Large language models are not
fair evaluators.
Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen,
Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. 2023c. Mint:
Evaluating llms in multi-turn interaction with tools
and language feedback.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa
Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh
Hajishirzi. 2023d. Self-instruct: Aligning language
models with self-generated instructions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023,
pages 13484–13508. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y . Zhao, Kelvin
Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V . Le. 2022. Finetuned

[PAGE 12]
language models are zero-shot learners. In The Tenth
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022.
OpenReview.net.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen
Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang,
Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, Rui Zheng, Xiaoran Fan,
Xiao Wang, Limao Xiong, Yuhao Zhou, Weiran
Wang, Changhao Jiang, Yicheng Zou, Xiangyang
Liu, Zhangyue Yin, Shihan Dou, Rongxiang Weng,
Wensen Cheng, Qi Zhang, Wenjuan Qin, Yongyan
Zheng, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huan, and Tao Gui.
2023. The rise and potential of large language model
based agents: A survey. CoRR, abs/2309.07864.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng,
Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin
Jiang. 2023. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions. CoRR,
abs/2304.12244.
Shukang Yin, Chaoyou Fu, Sirui Zhao, Ke Li, Xing
Sun, Tong Xu, and Enhong Chen. 2023. A survey on multimodal large language models. CoRR,
abs/2306.13549.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang,
Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan Xu,
Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, Weng Lam Tam, Zixuan Ma,
Yufei Xue, Jidong Zhai, Wenguang Chen, Zhiyuan
Liu, Peng Zhang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2023.
GLM-130B: an open bilingual pre-trained model.
Liangyu Zha, Junlin Zhou, Liyao Li, Rui Wang, Qingyi
Huang, Saisai Yang, Jing Yuan, Changbao Su, Xiang Li, Aofeng Su, Tao Zhang, Chen Zhou, Kaizhe
Shou, Miao Wang, Wufang Zhu, Guoshan Lu, Chao
Ye, Yali Ye, Wentao Ye, Yiming Zhang, Xinglong
Deng, Jie Xu, Haobo Wang, Gang Chen, and Junbo
Zhao. 2023. Tablegpt: Towards unifying tables, nature language and commands into one GPT. CoRR,
abs/2307.08674.
Ningyu Zhang, Jintian Zhang, Xiaohan Wang, Honghao Gui, Kangwei Liu, Yinuo Jiang, Xiang Chen,
Shengyu Mao, Shuofei Qiao, Yuqi Zhu, Zhen Bi,
Jing Chen, Xiaozhuan Liang, Yixin Ou, Runnan
Fang, Zekun Xi, Xin Xu, Lei Li, Peng Wang, Mengru Wang, Yunzhi Yao, Bozhong Tian, Yin Fang,
Guozhou Zheng, and Huajun Chen. 2023a. Knowlm
technical report.
Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang,
Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, and Guoyin Wang. 2023b. Instruction tuning for large language models: A survey.
CoRR, abs/2308.10792.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel
Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
Dewan, Mona T. Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin,
Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022.
OPT: open pre-trained transformer language models. CoRR, abs/2205.01068.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang,
Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du,
Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao
Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang
Liu, Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen.
2023. A survey of large language models. CoRR,
abs/2303.18223.
A Appendix
Hyperparameter Setting
Fine-tuning method LoRA
Batch Size 512
Device† NVIDIA A800
GPU number 6
Learning Rate (LR) 1e − 4
LoRAr 8
LoRAα 16
LoRA Dropout 0.05
Epoch 10
Table 2: Detailed experimental settings.
Win rate (%)
WinTieLoss
020 80100
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6b
OceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7b
OceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b0.650.320.03
0.140.84 0.02
0.050.600.35
Figure 10: Instance-level results (automatic evaluation)
Figure 11: Distribution of our OCEAN BENCH .

[PAGE 13]
The Cost for Fine-tuning GPT-3.5-Turbo
For fine-tuning GPT-3.5-turbo, we use the reference code provided by OpenAI to fine-tune their
language model. Overall, during the actual debugging process, we train and test the model multiple
times, spending a total of nearly 500 US dollars
(with the number of high-quality training samples
being around 2000). Each time we run the script to
train the model, it takes several hours.
The training cost is 0.008 USD per 1K tokens,
the input cost during use is 0.012 USD per 1K
tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K
tokens. Assuming our prompt’s input and output
for one conversation is 1000 tokens, and if we have
2000 training samples with actual testing on 10000
samples, our training cost would be approximately
16.8 USD. The usage cost of the model after finetuning is about 138.0 USD, making the total cost
around 154.8 USD. Since we debugged multiple
times in the actual process, the real expenditure
is greater. Overall, the overall training cost is not
high and is affordable.
Comparison between Our Fine-tuning
Method and the Prefix Prompts
In the paper, we define 5 marine science topics,
but this is a very broad categorization. In reality,
each major topic contains many subtopics. For
example, the topic ’Ecology and Environment’ includes subtopics like marine meteorology, marine
pollution, and over a dozen others. Altogether,
these subtopics amount to over 500. Each of these
subtopics is relatively independent and very important. Concatenating them as a prefix to GPT3.5-turbo would exceed its maximum length limit
and the actual usage cost would also be significant. Therefore, we believe that fine-tuning GPT3.5-turbo is a better choice. The prompt examples
are shown in Table 3 and Table 4.
The Similarity Calculating Method in the
Deduplication Procedure
Because comparing pairs for similarity involves
a significant number of calculations, we choose a
simple and effective method to address this challenge. We primarily use hash detection to compare
two samples. First, we pre-extract keywords from
the question part of each sample and then combine
them into a new string. For example, the keywords
for a data sample might be ’advice’, ’ocean’, and
’nuclear leakage’. We then employ hash detection
Instruction: You are a helpful ocean assistant. You are
to extract the question from the provided content.
Input: Raw sentences in the marine literature ( The
instruction prompt will be concatenated with raw sentences about seawater resources ).
Output:
Answer: Existing methods of seawater resource exploitation have many problems, such as causing soil erosion
and environmental pollution. Therefore, we need to seek
more sustainable development methods, including water
conservation, wastewater recycling, and the development
of new water resources.
Question: Please discuss your views on the current
methods of developing seawater resources.
Table 3: The prompt for fine-tuning GPT-3.5-turbo.
Instruction:
You are a helpful ocean assistant. You are to extract the
question from the provided content.
Input:
Raw sentences in the marine literature (The instruction
prompt will be concatenated with raw sentences about
seawater resources ).
The demonstration and answer pairs:
I will first give you some typical examples to help you
become a marine expert.
Demonstration 1: ... Answer 1: ...
Demonstration 2: ... Answer 2: ...
Demonstration 3: ... Answer 3: ...
Demonstration 4: ... Answer 4: ...
...
(The demonstration and answer pairs for each marine
subtopics. over 500 sub-categories. Each sub-categories
has different task types )
Output:
Answer: ... Question: ...
(Concatenating them as a prefix to GPT-3.5-turbo would
exceed its maximum length limit and the actual usage
cost is significant )
Table 4: The prefix prompt to GPT-3.5-turbo.
to compare the keywords of the two samples. This
method can relatively accurately prevent data leakage during the training process. It’s important to
note that sometimes the extraction of keywords can
lead to redundancy or repetition, so we sometimes
process them multiple times. Additionally, we also
randomly select some samples and use the GPT3.5-turbo API for detection to check for any cases
of incomplete processing.
Additionally, regarding the deduplication process between the benchmark and our training
dataset, we remove only a hundred or two hundred samples from the training set in the actual
experiment, which is not a large number.

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: | Unnamed: 0: Table 3: The prompt for fine-tuning GPT-3.5-turbo.
Row 2: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: tokens. Assuming our prompt’s input and output | Unnamed: 0:
Row 3: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: for one conversation is 1000 tokens, and if we have | Unnamed: 0:
Row 4: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: | Unnamed: 0: Instruction:
Row 5: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: 2000 training samples with actual testing on 10000 | Unnamed: 0: You are a helpful ocean assistant. You are to extract the
Row 6: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: samples, our training cost would be approximately | Unnamed: 0: question from the provided content.
Row 7: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: | Unnamed: 0: Input:
Row 8: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: 16.8 USD. The usage cost of the model after fine- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 9: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: | Unnamed: 0: Raw sentences in the marine literature (The instruction
Row 10: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: tuning is about 138.0 USD, making the total cost | Unnamed: 0: prompt will be concatenated with raw sentences about
Row 11: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: around 154.8 USD. Since we debugged multiple | Unnamed: 0: seawater resources ).
Row 12: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: times in the actual process, the real expenditure | Unnamed: 0: The demonstration and answer pairs:
Row 13: tokens, and the output cost is 0.016 USD per 1K: is greater. Overall, the overall training cost is not | Unnamed: 0: I will first give you some typical examples to help you
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 14]
Win rate (%)Task 1: AnalysisWin rate (%)Task 2: Commonsense ReasoningWin rate (%)Task 3: RecommendationWin rate (%)Task 4: EditingWinTieLoss
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7bOceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7bOceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Task 5: Question Anwsering
Win rate (%)
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Task 6: Classification
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Task 7: Open-ended GenerationTask 8: Description
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
90 Task 9: IdentificationTask 10: Letter Writing
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Task 11: JudgmentTask 12: Extraction
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7bOceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Task 13: Summary
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Task 14: Transformation
OceanGPTvs chatglm2-6bOceanGPTvs llama2-chat-7bOceanGPTvs vicuna-1.5-7b
Task 15: Others
Figure 12: Automatic evaluation results of OCEAN GPT in all tasks in OCEAN BENCH .
Prompt for "Fine-Tuned Agent as the Literature Extractor":
You are a helpful ocean assistant. You are to extract the question from each of the answer
provided.
Answer: This is a seahorse, belonging to the family Syngnathidae. Seahorses are
vertebrates commonly found in tropical and subtropical waters. They have unique morphology
and biological characteristics and are important organisms in marine ecosystems.
Prompt for "Evolving Agent as the Generator":
Assuming you are an expert in marine engineering and resources, please keep the meaning of
the following sentences unchanged and provide as much professional knowledge as possible.
Sentences:Please recommend some mineral resources found in the East China Sea.
Prompt for “Agent as the Inspector with Rule Constraints”:
Assuming you are an inspector in marine science, please filter and judge the sentences in
’Sentences’ based on the constraints provided below:
Constraints: Keyword Filter: Focus on literature that prominently mentions the terms
’coral reefs’, ’ocean acidification’, or ’deep-sea exploration’. Date Range: Only
consider articles published between 2010 and 2022. Author Filter: Prioritize works by
the Oceanic Research Institute. Type of Literature: Specifically look for ’experimental
studies’ and ’review articles’. Exclude ’conference papers’. Geographical Focus:
Highlight research that pertains to the Pacific Ocean region. Language Constraint: Only
select literature written in English. Abstract Inclusion: Ensure the abstract contains
the phrase ’climate impact’. Abstract Exclusion: Exclude any literature whose abstract
mentions ’laboratory simulation’.
Prompt for automatic evaluation using GPT4:
Please check if following sentences contain rich ocean related information. If so, output
"related". Otherwise, output "unrelated".
Sentences: Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) represents the largest pool of reduced carbon in
oceans and plays important roles in the ocean carbon cycle and food webs . DOC comprises
nearly half of the riverine organic carbon flux into oceans. Riverine DOC is involved in
numerous ecosystem functions, including key roles in chemical and biological processes.
Refractory and labile DOC are, respectively, important for carbon sequestra-tion in the
ocean and a vital food source for marine bacteria.
Table 5: The prompt example that we use in this work.

[TABLE page=14 index=1]
Columns: 90 | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | 90.1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | 90.2 | Unnamed: 5 | Unnamed: 6 | Unnamed: 7 | 90.3 | Unnamed: 8 | Unnamed: 9 | Unnamed: 10 | Unnamed: 11 | 90.4 | Unnamed: 12 | Unnamed: 13
Row 1: 90: 60 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 60.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 60 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: 60.0 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 60.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 2: 90: 30 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 30.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 30 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: 30.0 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 30.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 3: 90: 0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 0.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 0 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: 0.0 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 0.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 4: 90: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 0: OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: | Unnamed: 2: OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 3: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: | Unnamed: 5: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 6: OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: OceanGPT OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: | Unnamed: 12: OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 13: OceanGPT
Row 5: 90: vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 0: vs llama2-chat-7b vs chatglm2-6b | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: | Unnamed: 2: vs chatglm2-6b vs llama2-chat-7b | Unnamed: 3: vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: vs chatglm2-6b | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: vs llama2-chat-7b vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: vs chatglm2-6b | Unnamed: 9: vs llama2-chat-7b vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: | Unnamed: 12: vs vicuna-1.5-7b vs llama2-chat-7b | Unnamed: 13: vs chatglm2-6b
Row 6: 90: | Unnamed: 0: Task 6: Classification | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: | Unnamed: 2: Task 7: Open-ended Generation | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: Task 8: Description | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: Task 9: Identification | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: | Unnamed: 12: Task 10: Letter Writing | Unnamed: 13:
Row 7: 90: 9090 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 90.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 90 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 90.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 8: 90: 6060 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 60.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 60 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 60.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 9: 90: 30 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 30.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 3030 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 30.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 10: 90: 0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 0.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 0 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: 0.0 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 0.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 11: 90: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 0: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 1: OceanGPT | 90.1: | Unnamed: 2: OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 3: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: | Unnamed: 5: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 6: OceanGPT | Unnamed: 7: OceanGPT | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: OceanGPT OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: | Unnamed: 12: OceanGPT OceanGPT | Unnamed: 13: OceanGPT
Row 12: 90: vs chatglm2-6b | Unnamed: 0: vs llama2-chat-7b vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: | Unnamed: 2: vs chatglm2-6b vs llama2-chat-7b | Unnamed: 3: vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: | Unnamed: 5: vs chatglm2-6b | Unnamed: 6: vs llama2-chat-7b vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: vs vicuna-1.5-7b | Unnamed: 9: vs llama2-chat-7b vs chatglm2-6b | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: | Unnamed: 12: vs chatglm2-6b vs llama2-chat-7b | Unnamed: 13: vs vicuna-1.5-7b
Row 13: 90: | Unnamed: 0: Task 11: Judgment | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: | Unnamed: 2: Task 12: Extraction | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: Task 13: Summary | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: Task 14: Transformation | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: | Unnamed: 12: Task 15: Others | Unnamed: 13:
Row 14: 90: 90 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 90.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 90 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: 90.0 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 90.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 15: 90: 60 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 60.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 60 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: 60.0 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 60.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 16: 90: 30 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 30.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 30 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: 30.0 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 30.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
Row 17: 90: 0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 90.1: 0.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | 90.2: 0 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 90.3: | Unnamed: 8: 0 | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | 90.4: 0.0 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 15]
Instruction: How to conduct research on interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key radioactive nuclides?
OCEAN GPT The study of interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key radioactive
nuclides is a complex research field that requires a multidisciplinary approach. It
involves multiple techniques such as experimental research, theoretical research,
and numerical simulations. The following is a detailed outline of the steps
to conduct research on the interface chemistry and toxicological effects of key
radioactive nuclides: 1. Determine the specific radioactive nuclides of interest:
Different radioactive nuclides have different chemical properties and toxicological
effects. Therefore, it is necessary to select specific radioactive nuclides
of interest and establish a research plan. 2. Conduct laboratory experiments:
Laboratory experiments are crucial for studying the chemical properties and
toxicological effects of radioactive nuclides. The experiments involve measuring
the chemical properties of radioactive nuclides, such as their reactivity, stability,
and chemical reactivity. 3. Develop computational models: Computational models
can be used to simulate the chemical and toxicological effects of radioactive
nuclides. This involves developing mathematical models and algorithms to predict
the behavior of radioactive nuclides under different conditions. 4. Analyze
experimental data: Experimental data obtained from laboratory experiments need
to be analyzed and interpreted. This involves studying the experimental results
and comparing them with theoretical predictions. 5. Develop toxicological risk
assessment methods: Toxicological risk assessment methods are used to evaluate the
potential hazards of radioactive nuclides. This involves developing models that can
predict the toxicological effects of radioactive nuclides and assessing their risks
to human health. 6. Conduct field experiments: Field experiments are necessary
to study the behavior of radioactive nuclides in real-world environments. This
involves measuring the chemical and toxicological effects of radioactive nuclides
in different ecosystems and studying their distribution and transport. 7. Develop
guidelines for safe disposal: Safe disposal of radioactive nuclides is critical
for preventing environmental contamination and protecting human health. This
involves developing guidelines for the safe disposal of radioactive nuclides and
their storage and transport.
vicuna-1.5-7b Conducting research on interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key
radioactive nuclides requires a multidisciplinary approach, combining expertise in
chemistry, physics, biology, and environmental science. Here are some general steps
you can follow to conduct research in this area: 1. Identify the key radioactive
nuclides of interest: Start by identifying the specific radioactive nuclides that
you want to study. This may include elements such as uranium, plutonium, and cesium,
among others. 2. Develop a research question: Once you have identified the key
radioactive nuclides, develop a research question that addresses an important
aspect of their interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects. This question
should be specific and focused, and should guide your research efforts. 3. Design
experiments: Develop a set of experiments that will help you answer your research
question. This may involve conducting laboratory experiments, field studies, or
both. Be sure to choose experiments that are appropriate for your research question
and that use methods that are reliable and valid. 4. Collect and analyze data:
Once you have conducted your experiments, collect and analyze the data you have
generated. Be sure to carefully document your methods and results, and to interpret
your data in a clear and concise manner. 5. Interpret results and draw conclusions:
Use your data to draw conclusions about the interfacial chemistry and toxicological
effects of the key radioactive nuclides. Be sure to consider any limitations of
your study and to consider how your findings may be generalized to other contexts.
6.Communicate your results: Finally, share your findings with others through
publication in academic journals, presentations at conferences, and other means.
Be sure to clearly communicate the importance of your work and its implications for
interfacial chemistry and toxicology.
Table 6: Detailed case analysis on ocean science task. The input prompt is How to conduct research on
interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key radioactive nuclides?

[PAGE 16]
Task Type Example
Analysis Input: Analyze the impact of marine environmental dynamics processes on the wave environment. Output: The dynamic
processes of the oceanic environment have a significant influence on the wave conditions, such as the temperature of
seawater, salinity, and ocean current affecting the height and frequency of waves. Meanwhile, the wave conditions can
further impact the dynamics of ocean current and tides.
Classification Input: Classify the ships in the East China Sea according to their type. Output: Ships in the East China Sea can be
classified into categories such as merchant ships, fishing vessels, passenger ships, and warships, etc. Merchant ships are
primarily used for cargo transport, fishing vessels for fishery resources, passenger ships for tourism and personnel transport,
and warships for maritime security and defense. These diverse types of vessels are frequently active in the waters of the East
China Sea.
Commonsense Reasoning Input: Why are fish resources in the East China Sea gradually decreasing? Output: Fish resources in the East China
Sea are gradually decreasing, mainly due to the impact of factors such as overfishing and environmental pollution. With
the increase in population and economic development, fishing activities have been continuously strengthened, resulting in
over-exploitation of fish resources. In addition, marine environmental pollution also has adverse effects on the survival and
reproduction of fish resources. Therefore, protecting the marine environment and rationally developing fishing resources are
key to ensuring the sustainable development of fish resources in the East China Sea.
Description Input: Describe the classification and distribution areas of coral reefs. Output: Coral reefs are calcareous submarine structures formed by coral entities and their attachments. According to their crescent characteristics, they can be categorized into
large ring coral reefs, small ring coral reefs, crisscross serrated coral reefs, irregular shaped coral reefs, etc. Approximately
70% of the world’s coral reefs are distributed in tropical and subtropical sea areas, with the most important distribution areas
being the western Indian Ocean, western Pacific Ocean, and eastern Pacific Ocean.
Editing Input: Edit a big data report used for analyzing marine ecosystems. Output: Important parameters that can be tracked in
marine ecosystems include water temperature, salinity, direction of waves, quantity and species of plankton, rate of ocean
acidification, etc. In marine big data analysis, we use these data to train machine learning algorithms to understand the
changes in the marine ecosystem, forecast potential environmental changes, etc. By utilizing these critical parameters, we
can perceive the panorama and pattern of the marine ecosystem and extract valuable information from it to support adaptive
and sustainable management practices in the ocean.
Extraction Input: Extract the definition of the greenhouse effect and its causes. Output: The greenhouse effect refers to a ¨thermal
blanket¨formed by the absorption and reflection of solar heat radiation by greenhouse gases (such as carbon dioxide, methane,
fluorocarbons, etc.) in the atmosphere, thereby raising the surface temperature of the earth. The sources of greenhouse gases
include human activities, natural gases, deforestation, etc., which leads to an intensification of the greenhouse effect and
global warming.
Judgment Input: Is active intervention suitable for maintaining the coral reef ecosystem? Output: Active intervention can protect
coral reef ecosystems, such as through artificial restoration, controlling sea water pollution, controlling carbon emissions,
and reasonable development of coral reefs. Therefore, the coral reef ecosystem is suitable for active intervention and
maintenance.
Letter Writing Input: Write a letter to the local environmental protection agency about the waste discharge and pollution recently discovered
in the sea area, proposing solutions. Output: Dear xx Environment Bureau: Recently, we have discovered a large amount of
waste emission and pollution in the sea area, which has caused serious damage to our marine environment. We suggest
that you take a series of measures to strengthen the monitoring and management of pollution sources in the sea area,
punish illegal emissions in accordance with the law, and educate illegal polluting enterprises to enhance their environmental
protection awareness. We hope that you can take action to effectively protect our marine environment.
Open-ended Generation Input: Briefly introduce the principle and method of wave energy generation. Output: The principle of wave power
generation is to convert wave energy into mechanical energy, and then turn the mechanical energy into electrical energy
through a generator. The methods of wave power generation include: floating system, wave influx system, wave reflux
system, and wave pressure system.
Question Answering Input: What is three-dimensional digital ocean modeling technology? Output: Three-dimensional marine digital modeling
technology involves the use of advanced remote sensing, lidar, sonar, and other detection technologies to acquire surface and
subsurface oceanographic topographic data. Through digital modeling methods, a three-dimensional mathematical model of
the ocean can be constructed. This type of model can provide information on topography, ocean currents, hydrology and
acoustics, which is beneficial for applications in ocean resource development, environmental protection, and management,
among others.
Recognition Input: Identify the following sea fish species: sea bream, codfish, saury, and shark. Output: Dorada is a common type of
sea fish, laterally compressed in form with a big mouth, and is known for its delicious meat. Cod is also a common sea fish,
slender in shape with a soft hanging lower jaw, and is also a delicacy. Saury is a type of fish that enters ports from summer
to autumn and can be made into a variety of dishes. Sharks are carnivorous marine animals with many species, some of
which are primarily used as food, while others may attack humans.
Recommendation Input: Recommend a desalination method suitable for deep-sea water resource development Output: The development
of deep-sea water resources is suitable for the adoption of low-temperature seawater desalination technology, which uses
cooling water to lower the seawater temperature below the ambient temperature, condensing out fresh water. Compared to
traditional seawater desalination technology, low-temperature seawater desalination can conserve energy and reduce costs,
while the resulting brine is also more concentrated.
Summary Input: Provide a summary of the current status and future development prospects of offshore wind power generation
technology. Output: Ocean wind power generation technology is one of the hot technologies in the field of renewable
energy, its power generation efficiency is becoming increasingly high, equipment is becoming increasingly advanced, and
the costs are gradually decreasing. It has a broad development prospect and can inject new development momentum into
China’s marine economy.
Transformation Input: How to transform marine plants into green products? Output: The conversion process of marine plants can be
divided into initial collection and extraction of effective parts, followed by processing to obtain the final product. Among
them, extraction and processing are critical steps, and they vary for different marine plants. Common processing methods
include alkali extraction, acid extraction, and enzyme extraction. The resulting green products also vary, such as chlorophyll,
peptide substances, polysaccharide substances, etc.
Table 7: Examples for tasks in OCEAN BENCH .