[PAGE 1]
Binary Code Summarization: Benchmarking ChatGPT/GPT-4 and
Other Large Language Models
Xin Jin∗
The Ohio State University
jin.967@osu.edu
Jonathan Larson
Microsoft Research
jolarso@microsoft.com
Weiwei Yang
Microsoft Research
weiwei.yang@microsoft.com
Zhiqiang Lin
The Ohio State University
zlin@cse.ohio-state.edu
ABSTRACT
Binary code summarization, while invaluable for understanding
code semantics, is challenging due to its labor-intensive nature. This
study delves into the potential of large language models (LLMs) for
binary code comprehension. To this end, we presentBinSum, a comprehensive benchmark and dataset of over 557K binary functions
and introduce a novel method for prompt synthesis and optimization. To more accurately gauge LLM performance, we also propose
a new semantic similarity metric that surpasses traditional exactmatch approaches. Our extensive evaluation of prominent LLMs,
including ChatGPT, GPT-4, Llama 2, and Code Llama, reveals 10
pivotal insights. This evaluation generates 4 billion inference tokens, incurred a total expense of 11,418 US dollars and 873 NVIDIA
A100 GPU hours. Our findings highlight both the transformative
potential of LLMs in this field and the challenges yet to be overcome.
1 INTRODUCTION
Binary code comprehension is pivotal for binary analysis and reverse engineering, which delve into the intricate details of software
to understand its functionalities [73]. While the scope and outcomes
of reverse engineering can differ based on tasks such as malware
analysis [52, 52], vulnerability identification [34, 47], and symbol
recovery [40, 59]; the underlying objective remains consistent: to
reconstruct the program’s logic and garner insights tailored to taskspecific goals [48]. Mirroring this intersection of code comprehension and natural language, VirusTotal recently introduced “Code
Insight”, which employs Google’s Sec-PaLM to produce natural language summaries of potentially malicious code segments, enhancing threat understanding and detection for security analysts [11].
Although significant progress has been made in automating various binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary
code semantics largely remains a process where human expertise
is indispensable [48]. This task is challenging, demanding considerable skill and time investment, especially given the absence of
high-level semantics such as symbol names and data types. For
example, it took about 40 minutes on average for 31 reverse engineering professionals to understand malicious decompiled code
with less than 150 code lines [79]. Efforts such as the DARPA Cyber
Grand Challenge (CGC) [7] have propelled advancements in computers’ capacity to autonomously reason about program binaries.
However, these automated solutions are still distant from being
able to rival the expertise of human reverse engineering experts.
∗This work was partially completed during the author’s internship at Microsoft
Research.
Recent advances in machine learning, particularly the emergence of large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT and GPT4 [51], offer a promising avenue for addressing these challenges.
These models have unlocked the potential for “strong artificial intelligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like
intelligence and comprehension. The capabilities of LLMs have already initiated groundbreaking transformations in binary analysis
tasks. Notable examples include binary symbol recovery [28, 40]
and memory alias analysis [61]. Additionally, LLMs, particularly
advanced ones like ChatGPT have demonstrated promising results
in text/source code comprehension and summarization [ 70, 81].
The emergence and widespread adoption of LLMs across various
domains pose a pressing question: Can large language models, including ChatGPT, GPT-4, and other LLMs, effectively summarize the
semantics of binary code?
1.1 Challenges
The task to assess the full potential of LLMs in binary code summarization is far from straightforward due to the following challenges.
Lack of real-world dataset. First, unlike readily accessible textual
and source code corpora (e.g., CommonCrawl [6] and BigCode [41]),
the absence of a comprehensive and large-scale binary code summarization dataset with ground truth, encompassing various binaries
that conform to real-world compilation settings, poses a significant
obstacle. Additionally, while existing LLMs only accept text-like
input, binary code can be represented in different formats, such as
assembly and decompiled code, making it challenging to ascertain
the most suitable input for LLMs.
Semantic gaps in black-box models. Models like ChatGPT and
GPT-4 undergo pretraining on an extensive corpus of textual data
with sparsely represented binary code. It necessities mitigating the
semantic gap between pretraining and our task, i.e., binary code
summarization. Also, LLMs are commonly adapted to downstream
tasks via either fine-tuning or prompting strategies [46]. However,
finetuning LLMs are resource-intensive thus computationally infeasible, especially for the closed-source ChatGPT and GPT-4. For
prompting, it has been found that instructing LLMs with different
prompts can yield distinct performance [84]. For our task, devising effective prompts to maximize LLMs’ performance remains
challenging considering the black-box nature of LLMs, making it
hard to interpret what features or words contribute the most to the
summarization results.
arXiv:2312.09601v1 [cs.CR] 15 Dec 2023

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like
Row 1: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: prehensive benchmark and dataset of over 557K binary functions | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: intelligence and comprehension. The capabilities of LLMs have alRow 2: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: and introduce a novel method for prompt synthesis and optimiza- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: ready initiated groundbreaking transformations in binary analysis
Row 3: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: tion. To more accurately gauge LLM performance, we also propose | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: tasks. Notable examples include binary symbol recovery [28, 40]
Row 4: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: a new semantic similarity metric that surpasses traditional exact- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: and memory alias analysis [61]. Additionally, LLMs, particularly
Row 5: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: match approaches. Our extensive evaluation of prominent LLMs, | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: advanced ones like ChatGPT have demonstrated promising results
Row 6: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: including ChatGPT, GPT-4, Llama 2, and Code Llama, reveals 10 | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: in text/source code comprehension and summarization [70, 81].
Row 7: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: pivotal insights. This evaluation generates 4 billion inference to- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: The emergence and widespread adoption of LLMs across various
Row 8: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: kens, incurred a total expense of 11,418 US dollars and 873 NVIDIA | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: domains pose a pressing question: Can large language models, inRow 9: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: A100 GPU hours. Our findings highlight both the transformative | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: cluding ChatGPT, GPT-4, and other LLMs, effectively summarize the
Row 10: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: potential of LLMs in this field and the challenges yet to be overcome. | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: semantics of binary code?
Row 11: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: 1 INTRODUCTION | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like:
Row 12: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: Binary code comprehension is pivotal for binary analysis and re- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: 1.1 Challenges
Row 13: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: verse engineering, which delve into the intricate details of software | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like:
Row 14: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: The task to assess the full potential of LLMs in binary code summaRow 15: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: to understand its functionalities [73]. While the scope and outcomes | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like:
Row 16: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: rization is far from straightforward due to the following challenges.
Row 17: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: of reverse engineering can differ based on tasks such as malware | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like:
Row 18: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: analysis [52, 52], vulnerability identification [34, 47], and symbol | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: Lack of real-world dataset. First, unlike readily accessible textual
Row 19: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: recovery [40, 59]; the underlying objective remains consistent: to | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: and source code corpora (e.g., CommonCrawl [6] and BigCode [41]),
Row 20: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: reconstruct the program’s logic and garner insights tailored to task- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: the absence of a comprehensive and large-scale binary code summaRow 21: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: specific goals [48]. Mirroring this intersection of code comprehen- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: rization dataset with ground truth, encompassing various binaries
Row 22: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: sion and natural language, VirusTotal recently introduced “Code | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: that conform to real-world compilation settings, poses a significant
Row 23: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: Insight”, which employs Google’s Sec-PaLM to produce natural lan- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: obstacle. Additionally, while existing LLMs only accept text-like
Row 24: binary code comprehension. To this end, we present BinSum, a com-: guage summaries of potentially malicious code segments, enhanc- | telligence”, allowing interactions that closely mimic human-like: input, binary code can be represented in different formats, such as
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=1 index=2]
Columns: Xin Jin∗ | Jonathan Larson
Row 1: Xin Jin∗: The Ohio State University | Jonathan Larson: Microsoft Research
Row 2: Xin Jin∗: jin.967@osu.edu | Jonathan Larson: jolarso@microsoft.com
Row 3: Xin Jin∗: Weiwei Yang | Jonathan Larson: Zhiqiang Lin
Row 4: Xin Jin∗: Microsoft Research | Jonathan Larson: The Ohio State University
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=1 index=3]
Columns: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and
Row 1: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: code semantics largely remains a process where human expertise | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: GPT-4 undergo pretraining on an extensive corpus of textual data
Row 2: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: is indispensable [48]. This task is challenging, demanding consid- | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: with sparsely represented binary code. It necessities mitigating the
Row 3: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: erable skill and time investment, especially given the absence of | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: semantic gap between pretraining and our task, i.e., binary code
Row 4: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: high-level semantics such as symbol names and data types. For | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: summarization. Also, LLMs are commonly adapted to downstream
Row 5: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: example, it took about 40 minutes on average for 31 reverse en- | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: tasks via either fine-tuning or prompting strategies [46]. However,
Row 6: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: gineering professionals to understand malicious decompiled code | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: finetuning LLMs are resource-intensive thus computationally inRow 7: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: with less than 150 code lines [79]. Efforts such as the DARPA Cyber | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: feasible, especially for the closed-source ChatGPT and GPT-4. For
Row 8: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: Grand Challenge (CGC) [7] have propelled advancements in com- | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: prompting, it has been found that instructing LLMs with different
Row 9: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: puters’ capacity to autonomously reason about program binaries. | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: prompts can yield distinct performance [84]. For our task, devisRow 10: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: However, these automated solutions are still distant from being | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: ing effective prompts to maximize LLMs’ performance remains
Row 11: ious binary analysis tasks [24, 68], reverse engineering of binary: able to rival the expertise of human reverse engineering experts. | Semantic gaps in black-box models.Models like ChatGPT and: challenging considering the black-box nature of LLMs, making it
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
Varied outputs for the same semantics. LLMs produce outputs
in natural languages, and thus the generated binary code summarization is in fuzzy textual format with semantically similar but
syntactically different expressions, e.g., acronyms and synonyms.
Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but
presents its own set of difficulties. For instance, the same semantics can be expressed by different words, phrases, and sentences in
ground truth and LLM-generated summaries.
1.2 Insights
Addressing the aforementioned challenges, we propose a systematic
exploration of LLMs’ capacities in binary code comprehension.
Specifically, our study builds upon the following key insights:
Utilizing code comments as ground truth with various binary
representations. Developers typically annotate source code with
comments to elucidate both the programmer’s intent and the code’s
functionality, and consequently most existing research on source
code summarization [67] and binary code summarization [23] utilizes code comments as the ground truth. Moreover, the commercial
off-the-shelf (COTS) binaries are compiled with various settings,i.e.,
cross computer architectures and optimization levels. With such
diverse binaries, existing binary analysis efforts have used different
binary code representations, e.g., raw bytes in XDA [60], assembly
code in SymLM [40], and decompiled code in DITRY [ 28]. Thus,
we have constructed a large-scale dataset using code comments
as ground truth summaries with binaries compiled into 4 architectures and 4 optimization levels, from which 4 different binary
representations are further generated.
Exploiting in-context prompt synthesis and optimization. For
our task, prompts crafted by experienced binary analysis or prompt
engineering professionals may yield commendable performance of
LLMs. Nevertheless, this approach is constrained by its subjectivity
and may not fully optimize LLM performance. Meanwhile, LLMs
have recently shown the great protential of automatic prompt systhensis and optimization. Specifically, LLMs have the capacity akin
to that of human prompt engineers [84] and they exhibit the ability
to self-improve [37]. Therefore, we propose to first search over a
pool of prompt candidates that are generated by LLMs themselves
in an in-context manner, then optimize the LLM-generated and
human-crafted prompts, and finally select the optimal prompts that
achieve the best performance evaluated on our task.
Using semantic-embeddings to calculate the similarity. The
commonly used metrics (e.g., BLEU [54], METEOR [26], and ROUGE
[45]) for evaluation code summarization predominantly focus on
exact matching of n-grams. However, they fail to capture the same
semantics in acronyms, synonyms, and syntactically different but
semantically similar expressions. The assessment of LLM-generated
binary code summaries should be performed at the semantic level.
Therefore, we propose to evaluate LLMs’ performance by calculating similarity using semantic embeddings.
1.3 Contributions and Findings
These insights have guided our study design, resulting in 10 key
measurement results (R1-R10) (and 6 additional findings (F1-F6)).
In the following, we outline the key contributions:
• A large-scale, open source, and comprehensive binary code
summarization dataset: We have curated 44 open source projects
(with totally 11,475,734 lines of code), which are compiled into
binaries across 4 architectures (i.e., x86, x64, ARM, and MIPS)
and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extraction and function-comment matching, we obtain 557,664 binary
functions with comment-based ground truth summaries. We
further generated four binary code representations, including
raw bytes, assembly code, intermediate representations (IR), and
decompiled code (both with and without debugging symbols),
along with their source code.
• Novel techniques : To generate optimal prompts that maximize LLM performance, we have devised a four-step procedure,
including in-context prompt synthesis, prompt variant generation, prompt optimization, and task-specific prompt selection.
Moreover, we also introduce a novel semantic embedding-based
evaluation metric by calculating the semantic similarity between
ground truth and LLM-generated summaries for our task by
semantic embeddings generated from a pretrained LLM.
• Extensive measurement: We have focused on four state-ofthe-art LLMs: GPT-4, ChatGPT (GPT-3.5), Llama 2 [71], and Code
Llama [66], that have shown significant impact and advanced
performance in downstream tasks along with the existing binary
code summarization model BinT5 [23]. Our four critical sets of
evaluations generate 4,058,297,977 tokens in total with a cost of
11,418 US dollars and 873 NVIDIA A100 GPU hours, resulting
in the following findings. First, stripping debugging symbols
from binaries can lead to significant semantic loss (55.0%) (R1),
and decompiled code is the best representation for LLMs to understand binary code (R2). Second, among the LLMs, ChatGPT
and Code Llama perform the best in understanding binary code
when with and without debugging symbols, respectively (R3).
Code Llama consistently outperforms Llama 2, the base model
from which Code Llama is fine-tuned, but merely fine-tuning
CodeT5 on decompiled code does not yield satisfactory performance for BinT5 (R4). Additionally, our efficiency study reveals
that ChatGPT and Llama 2 models are up to 2.9× and 1.5× faster
than GPT-4 and Code Llama models, respectively ( R5). Third,
among the four computer architectures, LLMs perform the best
on the x64 and MIPS binaries (achieving up to 16.0% better scores)
given decompiled code with and without symbols, respectively
(R6). However, there are marginal performance gaps for LLMs
at different optimization levels (R7). Evaluations of the outputs
of different decompilers (Ghidra, Hex-Rays, and Angr) demonstrate that LLMs perform the best on Hex-Rays decompiled code
with a 60.7% better score ( R8). We further investigate which
symbols (i.e., function names, variable names, and data types)
contribute the most to binary code semantics and find function
names contribute the most to this semantics ( R9). Finally, we
also study the different prompt engineering techniques,i.e., zeroshot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought prompting, for our task,
and identify zero-shot prompts as the best jointly considering
the performance and cost (R10). In addition to the measurement
results, we have also obtained six findings (F1-F6) by case studies
(Appendix §A.6, §A.7, and §A.10), regarding to what extent LLM

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extracRow 1: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: presents its own set of difficulties. For instance, the same seman- | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: tion and function-comment matching, we obtain 557,664 binary
Row 2: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: tics can be expressed by different words, phrases, and sentences in | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: functions with comment-based ground truth summaries. We
Row 3: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: ground truth and LLM-generated summaries. | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: further generated four binary code representations, including
Row 4: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: raw bytes, assembly code, intermediate representations (IR), and
Row 5: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: 1.2 Insights | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: decompiled code (both with and without debugging symbols),
Row 6: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: along with their source code.
Row 7: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: Addressing the aforementioned challenges, we propose a systematic | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 8: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: exploration of LLMs’ capacities in binary code comprehension. | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: • Novel techniques: To generate optimal prompts that maxiRow 9: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: Specifically, our study builds upon the following key insights: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: mize LLM performance, we have devised a four-step procedure,
Row 10: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: including in-context prompt synthesis, prompt variant generaRow 11: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: Utilizing code comments as ground truth with various binary | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 12: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: tion, prompt optimization, and task-specific prompt selection.
Row 13: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: representations. Developers typically annotate source code with | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 14: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: Moreover, we also introduce a novel semantic embedding-based
Row 15: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: comments to elucidate both the programmer’s intent and the code’s | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 16: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: evaluation metric by calculating the semantic similarity between
Row 17: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: functionality, and consequently most existing research on source | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 18: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: ground truth and LLM-generated summaries for our task by
Row 19: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: code summarization [67] and binary code summarization [23] uti- | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 20: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: semantic embeddings generated from a pretrained LLM.
Row 21: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: lizes code comments as the ground truth. Moreover, the commercial | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 22: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: off-the-shelf (COTS) binaries are compiled with various settings, i.e., | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: • Extensive measurement: We have focused on four state-ofRow 23: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: cross computer architectures and optimization levels. With such | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: the-art LLMs: GPT-4, ChatGPT (GPT-3.5), Llama 2 [71], and Code
Row 24: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: diverse binaries, existing binary analysis efforts have used different | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: Llama [66], that have shown significant impact and advanced
Row 25: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: binary code representations, e.g., raw bytes in XDA [60], assembly | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: performance in downstream tasks along with the existing binary
Row 26: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: code in SymLM [40], and decompiled code in DITRY [28]. Thus, | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: code summarization model BinT5 [23]. Our four critical sets of
Row 27: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: we have constructed a large-scale dataset using code comments | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: evaluations generate 4,058,297,977 tokens in total with a cost of
Row 28: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: as ground truth summaries with binaries compiled into 4 archi- | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: 11,418 US dollars and 873 NVIDIA A100 GPU hours, resulting
Row 29: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: tectures and 4 optimization levels, from which 4 different binary | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: in the following findings. First, stripping debugging symbols
Row 30: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: representations are further generated. | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: from binaries can lead to significant semantic loss (55.0%) (R1),
Row 31: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: and decompiled code is the best representation for LLMs to unRow 32: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: Exploiting in-context prompt synthesis and optimization. For | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 33: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: derstand binary code (R2). Second, among the LLMs, ChatGPT
Row 34: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: our task, prompts crafted by experienced binary analysis or prompt | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 35: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: and Code Llama perform the best in understanding binary code
Row 36: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: engineering professionals may yield commendable performance of | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 37: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: when with and without debugging symbols, respectively (R3).
Row 38: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: LLMs. Nevertheless, this approach is constrained by its subjectivity | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 39: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: Code Llama consistently outperforms Llama 2, the base model
Row 40: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: and may not fully optimize LLM performance. Meanwhile, LLMs | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 41: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: from which Code Llama is fine-tuned, but merely fine-tuning
Row 42: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: have recently shown the great protential of automatic prompt sys- | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 43: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: CodeT5 on decompiled code does not yield satisfactory perforRow 44: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: thensis and optimization. Specifically, LLMs have the capacity akin | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 45: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: mance for BinT5 (R4). Additionally, our efficiency study reveals
Row 46: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: to that of human prompt engineers [84] and they exhibit the ability | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 47: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: that ChatGPT and Llama 2 models are up to 2.9× and 1.5× faster
Row 48: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: to self-improve [37]. Therefore, we propose to first search over a | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 49: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: than GPT-4 and Code Llama models, respectively (R5). Third,
Row 50: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: pool of prompt candidates that are generated by LLMs themselves | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 51: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: among the four computer architectures, LLMs perform the best
Row 52: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: in an in-context manner, then optimize the LLM-generated and | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 53: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: on the x64 andMIPS binaries (achieving up to 16.0% better scores)
Row 54: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: human-crafted prompts, and finally select the optimal prompts that | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 55: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: given decompiled code with and without symbols, respectively
Row 56: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: achieve the best performance evaluated on our task. | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-:
Row 57: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: (R6). However, there are marginal performance gaps for LLMs
Row 58: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: Using semantic-embeddings to calculate the similarity. The | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: at different optimization levels (R7). Evaluations of the outputs
Row 59: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: commonly usedmetrics (e.g., BLEU [54], METEOR [26], and ROUGE | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: of different decompilers (Ghidra, Hex-Rays, and Angr) demonRow 60: Precisely evaluating such summarization results is necessary but: [45]) for evaluation code summarization predominantly focus on | and 4 optimization levels (O0-O3). With our comment extrac-: strate that LLMs perform the best on Hex-Rays decompiled code
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
Source ProjectsCompilation
Binaries w/ Debugging Info
SourceCommentBinaryFunction-CommentMatching
Binary Analyzer
❷
Stripped BinariesStripping❶
Extraction❸❸❹❹❹
Dataset
Figure 1: Binary Summarization Dataset Construction
can understand binary code, GPT-4 summaries, and LLM summarizaition vulnerabilities. Our code and dataset are released at
https://github.com/xinjin95/BinSum.
2 DESIGN
In this section, we present the detailed design of how we measure
the binary code summarization capability of LLMs. Note that, similar to existing research [23, 33, 67, 75], we focus on summarizing
binary code at the function level. For clarity, we formalize this task
as: Given a binary function𝑓 extracted from binary executables and
represented as a textual representation𝑥 𝑓 ∈ X , which can manifest
as raw bytes, assembly code, intermediate representation (IR) code,
or decompiled code, we concatenate it with a predetermined prompt
𝐼, resulting in an augmented input 𝑥 ′
𝑓 = {𝐼 ; 𝑥 𝑓 }. Using this input, a
binary code summarization system, M : X → Y , generates a natural language summary 𝑦 ∈ Y , encapsulating the semantic crux of 𝑓 .
Our study of the binary code summarization task follows three
pivotal steps: (i) We first construct a comprehensive binary code
summarization dataset by compiling open-source repositories, resulting in diverse binaries across different architectures and optimization levels. These binaries are then further processed to yield
four distinct binary code representations. (ii) Next, we follow a fourstep procedure to synthesize, optimize, and select the most suitable
prompts, guided by task-specific evaluations. (iii) Finally, we evaluate four state-of-the-art generative LLMs and the existing binary
code summarization model (BinT5 [23]) on our dataset, using our
proposed semantic summary evaluation metric. In the subsequent
subsections, we provide the detailed design for these three steps.
2.1 Dataset Construction
Our study aims to gain a comprehensive understanding of LLMs,
which requires an extensive binary code dataset with ground truth.
Before constructing such a dataset, we explored existing ones that
could be readily employed. To the best of our knowledge, BinT5 is
the only work studying the same task as ours [23] but with a focus
on decompiled code. Its released data 1 only includes x86 binaries,
with an imbalanced distribution in terms of optimization levels, i.e.,
a rough ratio of 1:2:6:2 for O0-O3 binaries. We conclude that such a
1https://github.com/AISE-TUDelft/Capybara-BinT5
dataset, while useful, falls short of meeting our objectives of obtaining profound insights. Consequently, we opt to construct a dataset
from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.
Binary Compilation and Stripping. Our initial step involves curating public source projects from GNU Software [8], including wellknown ones that are extensively used by prior works [40, 43, 59],
such as coreutils, binutils, and findutils. The comprehensive list of 44 GNU projects is presented in Table 3, encompassing
a total of 11,475,734 lines of code. The reason for choosing these
GNU software projects is that they have been well-developed and
maintained. We then compile them into four architectures (x86, x64,
ARM, and MIPS) and four optimization levels (O0-O3) using GCC7.5, resulting in 8,760 unique binaries with debugging information.
Next, we generate another 8,760 stripped binaries by removing
symbols. It is worth noting that for ARM and MIPS binaries, we
utilize cross-compiler and stripping tools as part of the process
(details in §A.2).
Source Code Comment Extraction. As alluded in §1, we have
decided to use developer-written comments as ground truth. However, our binaries do not contain any comments, as the comments
have been removed by the compiler’s preprocessor. Therefore, we
need to extract code comments from the source code to annotate
binary functions, which is a completely new task, thus no publicly
available tools have been designed for this. As such, we first build a
source code parser to achieve this. Specifically, for each binary function in the DWARF entries of binaries with debugging information,
we pinpoint and use the comment of its corresponding function in
the source code as the ground truth.
However, this process requires the precise identification of both
comments and source code functions, especially function names,
which presents several challenges. First, developers typically compose comments not only for functions but also for other code elements, such as macro definitions, statements, and basic blocks, as
shown in Figure 2. It becomes difficult to discern comments that are
specifically intended for functions. For instance, only the comment
at lines 11 and 12 in Figure 2 is the desired comment for the target
function yylex_destroy. Moreover, rather than defining signatures in one line, this example shows a multiple-line signature definition (lines 13 to 15), which means that a simple text-parsing-based
method may fail to identify the desired function name. Furthermore,
in addition to commenting in the source (.c) files, developers also
create comments in the header ( .h) files, which further complex
the problem.
Fortunately, we have developed an automated source code comment parser (step ❷ in Figure 1) to address all these challenges, as
illustrated in Figure 3, upon srcML [30] and ANTLR [55]. Specifically, a manual study of 450 GNU source functions revealed that: (i)
Comments in header files usually recur in corresponding source file
function definitions; (ii) C function comments are predominantly
placed above their signatures, using ‘//’ and ‘/**/’ for single- and
multi-line comments. Given these observations, our parser targets
function and comment extraction from source files. The function
identification module constructs abstract syntax trees (ASTs) via
ANTLR, converts ASTs to XML documents with srcML, and locates XML-tagged functions, outputting function signatures (𝑠𝑖𝑔 𝑓 )
and line ranges ( 𝑙𝑜𝑐 𝑓 ). In parallel, the comment parsing module

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu- | comments and source code functions, especially function names,
Row 1: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: ral language summary y ∈ Y, encapsulating the semantic crux of f. | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: which presents several challenges. First, developers typically comRow 2: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: Our study of the binary code summarization task follows three | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: pose comments not only for functions but also for other code elRow 3: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: pivotal steps: (i) We first construct a comprehensive binary code | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: ements, such as macro definitions, statements, and basic blocks, as
Row 4: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: summarization dataset by compiling open-source repositories, re- | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: shown in Figure 2. It becomes difficult to discern comments that are
Row 5: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: sulting in diverse binaries across different architectures and opti- | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: specifically intended for functions. For instance, only the comment
Row 6: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: mization levels. These binaries are then further processed to yield | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: at lines 11 and 12 in Figure 2 is the desired comment for the target
Row 7: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: four distinct binary code representations. (ii) Next, we follow a four- | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: function yylex_destroy. Moreover, rather than defining signaRow 8: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: step procedure to synthesize, optimize, and select the most suitable | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: tures in one line, this example shows a multiple-line signature defiRow 9: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: prompts, guided by task-specific evaluations. (iii) Finally, we eval- | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: nition (lines 13 to 15), which means that a simple text-parsing-based
Row 10: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu-: uate four state-of-the-art generative LLMs and the existing binary | comments and source code functions, especially function names,: method may fail to identify the desired function name. Furthermore,
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=3 index=2]
Columns: Compilation Stripping | Unnamed: 0 | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.
Row 1: Compilation Stripping: Source Projects Binaries w/ Debugging Info Stripped Binaries | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: Binary Compilation and Stripping. Our initial step involves cuRow 2: Compilation Stripping: ❷ Extraction ❸ ❹ ❹ | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: rating public source projects fromGNU Software [8], including well-known ones that are extensively used by prior works [40, 43, 59],
Row 3: Compilation Stripping: ❸ ❹ | Unnamed: 0: Dataset | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: such as coreutils, binutils, and findutils. The comprehenRow 4: Compilation Stripping: | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: sive list of 44 GNU projects is presented in Table 3, encompassing
Row 5: Compilation Stripping: a total of 11,475,734 lines of code. The reason for choosing theseSource Binary Function- | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.:
Row 6: Compilation Stripping: Comment Comment Matching Binary Analyzer | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: GNU software projects is that they have been well-developed and
Row 7: Compilation Stripping: | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: maintained. We then compile them into four architectures (x86, x64,
Row 8: Compilation Stripping: Figure 1: Binary Summarization Dataset Construction | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: ARM, and MIPS) and four optimization levels (O0-O3) using GCCRow 9: Compilation Stripping: | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: 7.5, resulting in 8,760 unique binaries with debugging information.
Row 10: Compilation Stripping: | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: Next, we generate another 8,760 stripped binaries by removing
Row 11: Compilation Stripping: | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: symbols. It is worth noting that for ARM and MIPS binaries, we
Row 12: Compilation Stripping: can understand binary code, GPT-4 summaries, and LLM sum- | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: utilize cross-compiler and stripping tools as part of the process
Row 13: Compilation Stripping: marizaition vulnerabilities. Our code and dataset are released at | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: (details in §A.2).
Row 14: Compilation Stripping: https://github.com/xinjin95/BinSum. | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.:
Row 15: Compilation Stripping: | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: Source Code Comment Extraction. As alluded in §1, we have
Row 16: Compilation Stripping: | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: decided to use developer-written comments as ground truth. HowRow 17: Compilation Stripping: 2 DESIGN | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: ever, our binaries do not contain any comments, as the comments
Row 18: Compilation Stripping: In this section, we present the detailed design of how we measure | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: have been removed by the compiler’s preprocessor. Therefore, we
Row 19: Compilation Stripping: the binary code summarization capability of LLMs. Note that, sim- | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: need to extract code comments from the source code to annotate
Row 20: Compilation Stripping: ilar to existing research [23, 33, 67, 75], we focus on summarizing | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: binary functions, which is a completely new task, thus no publicly
Row 21: Compilation Stripping: binary code at the function level. For clarity, we formalize this task | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: available tools have been designed for this. As such, we first build a
Row 22: Compilation Stripping: as: Given a binary function f extracted from binary executables and | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: source code parser to achieve this. Specifically, for each binary funcRow 23: Compilation Stripping: represented as a textual representation x ∈ X, which can manifest | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: tion in the DWARF entries of binaries with debugging information,
Row 24: Compilation Stripping: f | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.:
Row 25: Compilation Stripping: as raw bytes, assembly code, intermediate representation (IR) code, | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: we pinpoint and use the comment of its corresponding function in
Row 26: Compilation Stripping: or decompiled code, we concatenate it with a predetermined prompt | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: the source code as the ground truth.
Row 27: Compilation Stripping: I , resulting in an augmented input x ′= {I ; x }. Using this input, a | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: However, this process requires the precise identification of both
Row 28: Compilation Stripping: f | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.:
Row 29: Compilation Stripping: f | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.:
Row 30: Compilation Stripping: binary code summarization system,M : X → Y, generates a natu- | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: comments and source code functions, especially function names,
Row 31: Compilation Stripping: ral language summary y ∈ Y, encapsulating the semantic crux of | Unnamed: 0: f | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: . which presents several challenges. First, developers typically comRow 32: Compilation Stripping: Our study of the binary code summarization task follows three | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: pose comments not only for functions but also for other code elRow 33: Compilation Stripping: pivotal steps: (i) We first construct a comprehensive binary code | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: ements, such as macro definitions, statements, and basic blocks, as
Row 34: Compilation Stripping: summarization dataset by compiling open-source repositories, re- | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: shown in Figure 2. It becomes difficult to discern comments that are
Row 35: Compilation Stripping: sulting in diverse binaries across different architectures and opti- | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: specifically intended for functions. For instance, only the comment
Row 36: Compilation Stripping: mization levels. These binaries are then further processed to yield | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: at lines 11 and 12 in Figure 2 is the desired comment for the target
Row 37: Compilation Stripping: four distinct binary code representations. (ii) Next, we follow a four- | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: function yylex_destroy. Moreover, rather than defining signaRow 38: Compilation Stripping: step procedure to synthesize, optimize, and select the most suitable | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: tures in one line, this example shows a multiple-line signature defiRow 39: Compilation Stripping: prompts, guided by task-specific evaluations. (iii) Finally, we eval- | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: nition (lines 13 to 15), which means that a simple text-parsing-based
Row 40: Compilation Stripping: uate four state-of-the-art generative LLMs and the existing binary | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: method may fail to identify the desired function name. Furthermore,
Row 41: Compilation Stripping: code summarization model (BinT5 [23]) on our dataset, using our | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: in addition to commenting in the source (.c) files, developers also
Row 42: Compilation Stripping: proposed semantic summary evaluation metric. In the subsequent | Unnamed: 0: | from scratch to align with our research goals, as shown in Figure 1.: create comments in the header (.h) files, which further complex
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched
2 characters back to the input stream. */
3 #define yyless(n) \
4 do \
5 { \
6 int yyless_macro_arg = (n); \
7 YY_DO_BEFORE_ACTION; \
8 } \
9 while ( 0 )
11 /* yylex_destroy is for both reentrant
12 and non-reentrant scanners. */
13 static int
14 yylex_destroy ( const char * yybytes,
15 int _yybytes_len )
16 {
17 /* Pop the buffer stack,
18 destroying each element. */
19 while(YY_CURRENT_BUFFER){
20 // Delete current buffer
21 yy_delete_buffer( YY_CURRENT_BUFFER );
22 YY_CURRENT_BUFFER_LVALUE = NULL;
23 yypop_buffer_state();
24 }
25 ...//skip for simplicity
26 return 0;
27 }
Figure 2: Motivating Example of Source Code Comment Extraction Challenges. This figure presents the yylex_destroy
function from Binutils-2.39 with a signature defined across
multiple lines (lines 13 to 16). A simple text parsing-based
solution will fail to identify the correct and complete function signature and comments.
.C
FunctionIdentification
CommentParsing
<𝑙𝑜𝑐!, 𝑠𝑖𝑔! >
<𝑙𝑜𝑐", 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡" >
Function-commentMatching<𝑙𝑜𝑐!, 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡!,𝑠𝑖𝑔!>
Function Entries
Comment EntriesFunction-comment EntriesSourceFiles
Figure 3: Source Code Comment Parser
uses regex to identify comment texts (𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑐) and their line ranges
(𝑙𝑜𝑐 𝑐). To associate functions with comments, we pair comments
and subsequent functions whose line numbers are adjacently sequential, yielding matched function-comment entries. It is worth
noting that we exclude internal function comments (e.g., comments
at lines 17 and 21) from our analysis. Because such comments do
not fully encapsulate the semantics of the function. Additionally,
mapping these comments to corresponding blocks in binary code
is exceptionally challenging, due to the lack of indicative symbols.
Function-Comment Matching Between Source and Binaries.
After obtaining source function-comment pairs, we must annotate
binary functions with these comments. Our proposed matching
approach is based on two insights: (i) Binaries with debugging information provide function names and addresses via DWARF entries.
Given control over the source code, we ensure DWARF symbols are
generated and we retain function addresses from non-stripped binaries; (ii) Internal binary functions possess unique, non-conflicting
names, acting as identifiers and facilitating matching with source
function-comment pairs. Based on these insights, Ghidra [21] is employed to parse DWARF entries, obtaining binary function names
and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the function name from every source function-comment entry’s signature
(𝑠𝑖𝑔 𝑓 ). The final matching process (❸ in Figure 1) pairs binary function addresses with their related source comments using function
names. This method identifies comments for 557,664 binary functions across 8,760 binaries with debugging symbols. At step❹ in Figure 1, four representations are generated for binary functions: raw
bytes, assembly code, IR code, and decompiled code (detailed in §3).
2.2 Prompt Synthesis and Optimization
As discussed in §1.2, we have observed the great potential of using
prompts to guide LLMs to generate summaries in a zero-shot manner. However, the ideal prompts for binary code summarization
remain implicit but necessary because LLMs are highly sensitive to
input prompts [84]. An intuitive solution is to seek prompts from
experienced prompt engineers or binary analysis professionals, but
this method has its limitations. First, human prompt creators might
be limited by their knowledge and creativity, leading to suboptimal
prompts. Furthermore, LLMs can exhibit behavior that deviates
from human expectations [84]. Lastly, it is not clear whether such
prompts can optimize LLMs’ performance as LLMs are black-box.
In Figure 4, we propose a four-step solution, encompassing: (1) incontext prompt synthesis, (2) prompt variant generation, (3) prompt
optimization, and (4) task-specific prompt selection.
(1) In-context Prompt Synthesis. In this approach, we harness
LLMs to generate a pool of candidate prompts by themselves within
the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is inspired by the way human users engage with LLMs when confronted
with a new task. In this scenario, human users often need to experiment with various prompts to elicit the desired responses. Due to the
virtually unlimited prompt search space, manually generating numerous prompts is very challenging. Meanwhile, LLMs themselves
have shown very promising text generation capacities [51], which
motivates us to propose an automated prompt synthesis approach.
Formally, we consider our binary code summarization task specified by the dataset D = {𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖 }𝑁
𝑖=1 with a prompt targeting model
M, where 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑦𝑖 are the input binary code and the code summary. Our objective is to generate a suitable prompt, denoted as 𝑝,
in a manner that when M is given the concatenated input (𝑝; 𝑥),
M generates the corresponding output 𝑦. We cast this task as an
optimization problem to find the optimal prompt ˆ𝑝. This optimization is centered around maximizing the expected score 𝑆 M (𝑝, 𝑥, 𝑦),
across all potential pairs of (𝑥, 𝑦):
ˆ𝑝 = arg max
𝑝
𝑆 M (𝑝) = arg max
𝑝
E(𝑥,𝑦 ) [𝑆 M (𝑝, 𝑥, 𝑦)] (1)
where 𝑆 M (·) could be computed in several ways, such as the aggregated token probability [84] and the beam search probability [44].
However, we observe that API-based LLMs like ChatGPT are blackbox generators. That is, the LLM output does not contain any probability products; thus, these probability-based score functions cannot apply to our task. Alternatively, we directly take the top-1
LLM-generated prompt as ˆ𝑝 as it is produced by maximizing the
autoregressive prediction probability [51], which can represent the
maximum score of 𝑆 M (𝑝, 𝑥, 𝑦). Apart from synthesized prompts,

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: uses regex to identify comment texts (t ext ) and their line rangesc | M, where x and y are the input binary code and the code sum-i i
Row 1: uses regex to identify comment texts (t ext ) and their line rangesc: (loc ). To associate functions with comments, we pair commentsc | M, where x and y are the input binary code and the code sum-i i: mary. Our objective is to generate a suitable prompt, denoted as p ,
Row 2: uses regex to identify comment texts (t ext ) and their line rangesc: and subsequent functions whose line numbers are adjacently se- | M, where x and y are the input binary code and the code sum-i i: in a manner that whenM is given the concatenated input (p; x),
Row 3: uses regex to identify comment texts (t ext ) and their line rangesc: quential, yielding matched function-comment entries. It is worth | M, where x and y are the input binary code and the code sum-i i: M generates the corresponding output y. We cast this task as an
Row 4: uses regex to identify comment texts (t ext ) and their line rangesc: noting that we exclude internal function comments (e.g., comments | M, where x and y are the input binary code and the code sum-i i: optimization problem to find the optimal prompt p . This optimizaRow 5: uses regex to identify comment texts (t ext ) and their line rangesc: at lines 17 and 21) from our analysis. Because such comments do | M, where x and y are the input binary code and the code sum-i i: tion is centered around maximizing the expected score SM (p, x, y),
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=4 index=2]
Columns: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the funcRow 1: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 2 characters back to the input stream. */ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: tion name from every source function-comment entry’s signature
Row 2: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 3 #define yyless(n) \ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 3: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 4 do \ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: (sig ). The final matching process (❸ in Figure 1) pairs binary funcRow 4: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: f
Row 5: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 5 { \ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 6: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: tion addresses with their related source comments using function6 int yyless_macro_arg = (n); \ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 7: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 7 YY_DO_BEFORE_ACTION; \ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: names. This method identifies comments for 557,664 binary funcRow 8: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 8 } \ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 9: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 9 while ( 0 ) | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: tions across 8,760 binaries with debugging symbols. At step❹ in FigRow 10: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 10 | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: ure 1, four representations are generated for binary functions: raw
Row 11: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 11 /* yylex_destroy is for both reentrant | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 12: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 12 and non-reentrant scanners. */ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: bytes, assembly code, IR code, and decompiled code (detailed in §3).
Row 13: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 13 static int | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 14: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 14 yylex_destroy (const char * yybytes, | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 15: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 15 int _yybytes_len ) | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: 2.2 Prompt Synthesis and Optimization
Row 16: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 16 { | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 17: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 17 /* Pop the buffer stack, | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: As discussed in §1.2, we have observed the great potential of using
Row 18: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 18 destroying each element. */ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 19: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 19 while(YY_CURRENT_BUFFER){ | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: prompts to guide LLMs to generate summaries in a zero-shot manRow 20: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 20 // Delete current buffer | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 21: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: ner. However, the ideal prompts for binary code summarization
Row 22: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 21 yy_delete_buffer( YY_CURRENT_BUFFER | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: );
Row 23: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 22 YY_CURRENT_BUFFER_LVALUE = NULL; | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: remain implicit but necessary because LLMs are highly sensitive to
Row 24: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 23 yypop_buffer_state(); | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 25: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 24 } | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: input prompts [84]. An intuitive solution is to seek prompts from
Row 26: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 25 ...//skip for simplicity | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: experienced prompt engineers or binary analysis professionals, but
Row 27: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 26 return 0; | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-:
Row 28: 1 /* Return all but the first "n" matched: 27 } | and boundaries (start and end addresses). We then extract the func-: this method has its limitations. First, human prompt creators might
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=4 index=3]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Function | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is inRow 1: Unnamed: 0: | Function: Identification <loc!, sig! > | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is in-: spired by the way human users engage with LLMs when confronted
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Function: | Unnamed: 1: Function-comment | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is in-: with a new task. In this scenario, human users often need to experiRow 3: Unnamed: 0: .C | Function: | Unnamed: 1: Matching | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: <loc!, text!, sig!> | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is in-:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Source | Function: Comment | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is in-: mentwith various prompts to elicit the desired responses. Due to the
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Files | Function: Parsing <loc " , text " > | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Function-commentEntries | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is in-: virtually unlimited prompt search space, manually generating nuRow 6: Unnamed: 0: | Function: Comment Entries | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is in-: merous prompts is very challenging. Meanwhile, LLMs themselves
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Function: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is in-: have shown very promising text generation capacities [51], which
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Function: Figure 3: Source Code Comment Parser | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | the context of binary code summarization. This design choice is in-: motivates us to propose an automated prompt synthesis approach.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
Alice, a binary reverse engineering professional, was given the following promptsforabinarycodesummarizationtask: <PROMPT>Here are Alice’s responses:# BinaryCode Example 1>> Input:<Code 1>>> Output:<Ground Truth Summary 1>…# Binary Code Example N>> Input:<Code N>>> Output:<Ground Truth Summary N>What’s the best fit for <PROMPT>？
Produce a different version of the subsequent instruction while retaining its semantic significance:<PROMPT>
Asaprompt optimizer, you are asked to optimize the following prompt to maximize binary code summarization performance:<PROMPT>
(1)In-context Prompt Synthesis
(2)Prompt Variant Generation
Reverse engineer this binary code and provide a high-level explanation.….
Synthesized Prompts
You’re anAI assistant for binary code summarization. Canyousummarize afunction in human language?….
Human Crafted Prompts
(3)Prompt Optimization
Binary SamplesLLMs
GroundTruthEvaluator
Summaries
SelectedPrompts
(4)Task-specificPromptSelection
Prompt Candidates
Figure 4: Prompt Synthesis and Optimization
we also include human-crafted prompts to increase the size and
diversity of our prompt candidate pool as demonstrated in Figure 4.
(2) Prompt Variant Generation. In our initial prompt candidate
pool, there may be instances where this synthesis approach falls
short, either due to a lack of diversity or an absence of candidates
with sufficiently high scores. In response to such problems, we generate prompt variants that are semantically similar to the candidate
prompts as shown in Figure 4. This approach essentially explores
the search space in close proximity to the current best candidates.
Therefore, it enables us to create new prompts that are more likely
to yield favorable results.
(3) Prompt Optimization. To further enhance the performance of
LLMs in the context of binary code summarization, we introduce a
strategy to optimize the previously synthesized prompts and their
variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated
by prior research, showing that LLMs can optimize the problems
of linear regression and traveling salesman [80], and LLMs can also
self-improve [37]. In our task, the advantage of employing LLMs
for prompt optimization lies in their ability to comprehend natural language, i.e., enabling us to convey our prompt optimization
objectives by high-level textual instructions without formal specifications. Given the candidate prompts, we instruct LLMs to serve
as a prompt optimizer by a meta-instruction. This meta-instruction
encapsulates the objective function, i.e., maximizing performance,
and solution constraints, i.e., the context of the binary code summarization task, as shown in Figure 4.
(4) Task-Specific Prompt Selection. After generating a pool of
prompt candidates by prompt synthesis and optimization, the subsequent selection step becomes crucial in determining the most
promising candidates for our task. This process closely aligns with
the well-established problem of best arm identification in Upper
Confidence Bound (UCB) optimization [63]. In this context, arms
correspond to the prompt candidates, the hidden value of each arm
represents its performance on our task, and the arm-pulling action
corresponds to evaluating prompts with randomly selected data
points. The ultimate objective is to identify the top-performing arms
while minimizing the number of pull efforts required to achieve
this outcome.
Evaluating each candidate prompt on our entire dataset is a
resource-intensive process and prohibitively expensive. Inspired by
previous work that efficiently estimates prompt performance [84],
we assess prompt candidates by evaluating them on a randomly
selected subset of data samples from our dataset. Figure 4 presents
how we proceed: We first generate the binary code summary by
querying LLMs with concatenated every prompt candidate and the
test binary sample. These generated summaries are then evaluated
by calculating semantic similarity scores to ground truth (see the
evaluator details in §2.3). Finally, the prompts with the best scores
are selected as the final prompts for our subsequent evaluations.
2.3 Testing and Semantic Evaluation
Our goal is to assess existing LLMs’ performance on our task. For
this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code
summarization and (2) semantic summary similarity evaluation.
(1) LLM Testing on Binary Code Summarization. To generate
summaries, we concatenate the selected prompt with the test binary code sample for model input preparation. This configuration
essentially places us in a zero-shot setting, jointly considering both
performance and cost considerations (see §4.5 for the evaluations
of different prompting settings). As LLMs are generative models,
they can generate summaries of varying lengths. Nevertheless, excessively verbose and lengthy summaries are generally regarded as
low-quality [39]. Therefore, we impose limits on response length
for our target models. For instance, we explicitly specify these limits
in our prompts with the instruction “summarize ... in 𝑁 words”,
where 𝑁 is the average number of words in the ground-truth summaries from our dataset. We observe that our test models exhibit an
adaptive length behavior when generating summaries. That is, they
tend to produce summaries with lengths that closely hover near
the predetermined length limit, demonstrating a capacity to adjust
the length intelligently without rigidly and dogmatically adhering
to the predetermined length limit. This is beneficial considering
the inherent diversity of binary code samples.
(2) Semantic Summary Similarity Evaluation. To assess LLMgenerated binary code summaries, we aim to estimate how they
align with the ground-truth summaries. For this, we notice that
prior source and binary code summarization research [23, 67] both

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code
Row 1: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: by prior research, showing that LLMs can optimize the problems | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: summarization and (2) semantic summary similarity evaluation.
Row 2: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: of linear regression and traveling salesman [80], and LLMs can also | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 3: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: (1) LLM Testing on Binary Code Summarization. To generate
Row 4: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: self-improve [37]. In our task, the advantage of employing LLMs | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 5: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: summaries, we concatenate the selected prompt with the test biRow 6: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: for prompt optimization lies in their ability to comprehend natu- | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 7: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: nary code sample for model input preparation. This configuration
Row 8: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: ral language, i.e., enabling us to convey our prompt optimization | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 9: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: essentially places us in a zero-shot setting, jointly considering both
Row 10: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: objectives by high-level textual instructions without formal spec- | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 11: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: performance and cost considerations (see §4.5 for the evaluations
Row 12: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: ifications. Given the candidate prompts, we instruct LLMs to serve | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 13: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: of different prompting settings). As LLMs are generative models,
Row 14: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: as a prompt optimizer by a meta-instruction. This meta-instruction | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 15: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: they can generate summaries of varying lengths. Nevertheless, exRow 16: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: encapsulates the objective function, i.e., maximizing performance, | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 17: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: cessively verbose and lengthy summaries are generally regarded as
Row 18: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: and solution constraints, i.e., the context of the binary code sum- | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 19: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: low-quality [39]. Therefore, we impose limits on response length
Row 20: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: marization task, as shown in Figure 4. | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code:
Row 21: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: for our target models. For instance, we explicitly specify these limits
Row 22: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: (4) Task-Specific Prompt Selection. After generating a pool of | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: in our prompts with the instruction “summarize ... in N words”,
Row 23: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: prompt candidates by prompt synthesis and optimization, the sub- | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: where N is the average number of words in the ground-truth sumRow 24: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: sequent selection step becomes crucial in determining the most | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: maries from our dataset. We observe that our test models exhibit an
Row 25: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: promising candidates for our task. This process closely aligns with | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: adaptive length behavior when generating summaries. That is, they
Row 26: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: the well-established problem of best arm identification in Upper | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: tend to produce summaries with lengths that closely hover near
Row 27: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: Confidence Bound (UCB) optimization [63]. In this context, arms | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: the predetermined length limit, demonstrating a capacity to adjust
Row 28: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: correspond to the prompt candidates, the hidden value of each arm | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: the length intelligently without rigidly and dogmatically adhering
Row 29: variants using the LLMs themselves. Our design choice is motivated: represents its performance on our task, and the arm-pulling action | this, we follow a two-step process: (1) LLM testing on binary code: to the predetermined length limit. This is beneficial considering
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
Summary EncoderSummary Encoder
Ground Truth Comment
[0.12, -1.11, …, 0.23]Semantic Embedding[0.12, -1.11, …, 0.23]
LLM-generatedSummary
Semantic Embedding
Similarity FunctionSemantic Similarity Score
Figure 5: Semantic Summary Similarity Calculation
use exact matching-based metrics, e.g., BLEU [54], METEOR [26],
and ROUGE [45]. We have found that these metrics fall short in
capturing the essential semantics of summaries (see F4 and Appendix §A.6). Alternatively, we propose solving this problem based
on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained
LLMs, such as BERT and XLNet, have gained success in text semantic modeling tasks [49]. Therefore, we can calculate the semantic
similarity between LLM-generated and ground-truth summaries
using these pre-trained models as the semantic measurement.
Formally, given two sequences of words representing a generated summary 𝑆 = {𝑤 1, 𝑤2, ..., 𝑤𝑛 } and a ground truth summary reference ˆ𝑆 = { ˆ𝑤 1, ˆ𝑤 2, ..., ˆ𝑤𝑚 }, the summary encoder E,
which is a pretrained LLM, generates semantic embeddings for
each token of 𝑆 and ˆ𝑆, respectively: E (𝑆) = {𝑒𝑤1, 𝑒𝑤2, ..., 𝑒𝑤𝑛 } and
E ( ˆ𝑆) = {𝑒 ˆ𝑤1, 𝑒 ˆ𝑤2, ..., 𝑒 ˆ𝑤𝑚 }, where 𝑒𝑤 ∈ R𝑁 is the token embedding for token 𝑤 . Then we compute the embeddings 𝑒𝑆 ∈ R𝑁 and
𝑒 ˆ𝑆 ∈ R𝑁 representing the entire semantics of 𝑆 and ˆ𝑆 by aggregating their token embeddings:
𝑒𝑆 = 1
|𝑆 |
𝑛∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑒𝑤𝑖 , 𝑒 ˆ𝑆 = 1
| ˆ𝑆 |
𝑚∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑒 ˆ𝑤 𝑗 (2)
Here, we use the mean pooling as the aggregation function which
has shown superior results in text embedding tasks [65]. Finally, we
calculate the semantic similarity between generated summaries and
ground-truth summary references by the cosine similarity function
following the best practice [50]:
𝑠𝑖𝑚 (𝑆, ˆ𝑆) =
𝑒𝑆 ·𝑒⊤
ˆ𝑆
||𝑒𝑆 || × || 𝑒 ˆ𝑆 || =
Í𝑁
𝑖=1 𝑒 (𝑖 )
𝑆 × 𝑒 (𝑖 )
ˆ𝑆
√︃Í𝑁
𝑖=1 𝑒 (𝑖 )
𝑆
×
√︂
Í𝑁
𝑖=1 𝑒 (𝑖 )
ˆ𝑆
(3)
The semantic similarity score 𝑠𝑖𝑚 (𝑆, ˆ𝑆) quantifies the alignment
between generated summaries and summary references. A higher
similarity score indicates a better quality of the generated summary. Figure 5 illustrates the process of calculating this semantic
similarity score.
3 IMPLEMENTATION
Dataset Construction. As depicted in §2.1, we have built a binary code summarization dataset by compiling 44 open-source
projects with 11,475,734 total lines of code (Table 3 in Appendix has
more details). Our dataset contains 557,664 binary functions with
ground truth summaries. These functions are from various binaries,
and their distributions across architectures (x64, x86, ARM, MIPS)
and optimization levels (O0-O3) are presented in Table 4 in the
appendix for readers of interest. For each function in our dataset,
we generated four binary code representations along with source
code:
• Raw bytes are directly extracted from binaries based on the
function start and end addresses (identified in §2.1).
• Assembly code is generated by parsing ELF binaries using
capstone [2] and pyelftools [18] libraries.
• IR code is the IDA microcode generated by our IDA plugin
built upon the ida_hexrays.gen_microcode API [13] where
we have followed prior binary analysis research [82, 83] to use
the widely adopted IDA microcode as IR code.
• Decompiled code encompasses outputs generated by Ghidra,
Hex-rays, and Angr, using the getDecompiledFunction [17],
idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]
APIs, respectively. We have chosen Ghidra and Hex-rays as they
are prominent decompilers. Angr, on the other hand, has been
selected due to its rapid growth and comprehensive capabilities
in binary analysis.
• Source code is generated by parsing source files according to
functions’ start and end line numbers. Note that we exclude the
function comments to avoid information leakage to LLMs when
testing their capability of summarization.
Prompt Synthesis and Evaluation. We have generated a set of
320 prompt candidates based on our prompt synthesis and optimization approach. As mentioned in the task-specific prompt selection
section of §2.2, it is prohibitively expensive and thus impractical
to evaluate all prompt candidates on the entire binary summarization dataset. Hence, we randomly select 1000 binary function
samples from our dataset to conduct binary code summarization
using each prompt candidate. Table 5 presents the top 40 prompts
ranked by semantic similarity. We have selected the best prompt
for our subsequent evaluations. For a fair comparison, we employ
the same prompt for all models, except for BinT5, which only takes
the decompiled code as input (see §A.5 for more details).
Evaluation Metrics. Our evaluation metrics include the semantic
similarity metric that we proposed in §2.3. Specifically, we implemented our evaluation framework on top of Pytorch [56], SentenceTransformers [65], Scipy [72], and Sentencepiece [42]. For the summary encoder model, we use the pre-trained all-mpnet-base-v2
model, which performs the best on 14 text embedding tasks [19].
To efficiently compute𝑒𝑆 and 𝑒 ˆ𝑆 in Equation 2, we store token embeddings in a Chroma vector database [4]. The calculated semantic
similarity scores range from -1 to 1 where a score close to 1 indicates a high quality of LLM-generated code summaries. In addition
to our proposed metric, we also calculate and report the scores

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]
Row 1: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: LLMs, such as BERT and XLNet, have gained success in text seman- APIs, respectively. We have chosen Ghidra and Hex-rays as they
Row 2: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: tic modeling tasks [49]. Therefore, we can calculate the semantic are prominent decompilers. Angr, on the other hand, has been
Row 3: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: similarity between LLM-generated and ground-truth summaries selected due to its rapid growth and comprehensive capabilities
Row 4: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: using these pre-trained models as the semantic measurement. in binary analysis.
Row 5: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: Formally, given two sequences of words representing a gen- • Source code is generated by parsing source files according to
Row 6: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: erated summary S = {w1, w2, ..., w } and a ground truth sum- nfunctions’ start and end line numbers. Note that we exclude the
Row 7: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: mary reference S = {w1, w2, ..., wˆ }, the summary encoder E, mfunction comments to avoid information leakage to LLMs when
Row 8: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: which is a pretrained LLM, generates semantic embeddings for testing their capability of summarization.
Row 9: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: each token of S and S , respectively: E(S) = {e } andw1 , e w2 , ..., e wn Prompt Synthesis and Evaluation.We have generated a set of
Row 10: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: E(S) = { e , e , ..., e }, where e ∈ R Nis the token embedRow 11: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: ?̂?1 ?̂?2 w m w320 prompt candidates based on our prompt synthesis and optimizaRow 12: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: ding for token w . Then we compute the embeddings e andS ∈ R Ntion approach. As mentioned in the task-specific prompt selection
Row 13: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: ∈ RNe section of §2.2, it is prohibitively expensive and thus impracticalSrepresenting the entire semantics of S and S by aggregatRow 14: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: ing their token embeddings: to evaluate all prompt candidates on the entire binary summaRow 15: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: rization dataset. Hence, we randomly select 1000 binary function
Row 16: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: ∑︁m1 ∑︁n 1 samples from our dataset to conduct binary code summarization
Row 17: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: e (2)S = e wi , e = e w
Row 18: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: | S| S j
Row 19: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: i= 1 |S |j=1using each prompt candidate. Table 5 presents the top 40 prompts
Row 20: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: ranked by semantic similarity. We have selected the best prompt
Row 21: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: Here, we use the mean pooling as the aggregation function which for our subsequent evaluations. For a fair comparison, we employ
Row 22: on semantic measurement. For this, we observe that pre-trained idaapi.decompile [14], and angr.analyses.Decompiler [1]: has shown superior results in text embedding tasks [65]. Finally, we the same prompt for all models, except for BinT5, which only takes
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
Table 1: Models and Execution Statistics.
# of TokensModel Creator # Parameters Modality # Max Tokens Access Input Output Total Cost
GPT-4 OpenAI 1.7T [69] text 32K API 309,401,126 19,678,448 329,079,574 $10,462.74
ChatGPT OpenAI 175B [3] text 16K API 296,524,698 16,338,012 312,862,710 $954.93
Llama 2 (7B) Meta AI 7B text 4,096 Open 736,413,994 33,195,771 769,609,765 163 GPU Hours
Llama 2 (13B) Meta AI 13B text 4,096 Open 736,413,994 29,699,869 766,113,863 175 GPU Hours
Code Llama (7B) Meta AI 7B text and code 100K Open 736,413,994 40,016,196 776,430,190 253 GPU Hours
Code Llama (13B) Meta AI 13B text and code 100K Open 736,413,994 33,323,576 769,737,570 266 GPU Hours
BinT5 [23] Al-Kaswan et al. 220M code 512 Open 326,007,985 8,456,320 334,464,305 16 GPU Hours
of BLEU [54], METEOR [26], and ROUGE-L [ 45] to facilitate future work, as these metrics have previously been employed in both
source and binary code summarization research [23, 67, 75]. The calculation details of BLEU, METEOR, and ROUGE-L are in Appendix
§A.4. BLEU, METEOR, and ROUGE-L scores are scaled between 0
and 1, where higher values signify superior summarization quality.
Targeted LLMs. The LLMs of our interest are GPT-4, ChatGPT,
Llama 2 (7B), Llama 2 (13B), Code Llama (7B), Code Llama (13B),
and BinT5 [23], as presented in Table 1, which has exhibited dominant performance across numerous NLP and code-related tasks
[15, 51, 71]. To test GPT-4 and ChatGPT, we use OpenAI’s chat
completion API (openai.Completion.create) [16], which have
called gpt-4-0613 and gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613 backend models, corresponding to the 0613 snapshots, released on June 13th,
2023. To get consistent results, we have set the temperature parameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to
0.1. Furthermore, we set bothtop_p and n at 1 to obtain the top-1 results [16]. Regarding the parameters stop and max_tokens, we opt
for the default values [16], allowing the models to autonomously
determine when to conclude their responses. To enhance inference
speed, we have implemented multi-threading, utilizing five and
six parallel threads for GPT-4 and ChatGPT, respectively, while
ensuring compliance with the rate limits set by OpenAI [22].
We have donwloaded Llama models from Huggingface, including
meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf, meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-chat-hf,
codellama/CodeLlama-7b-Instruct-hf, and codellama/CodeLlama13b-Instruct-hf [5, 12]. To run these models, we implemented an inference framework based on Pytorch [56], transformers [78], Scikitlearn [58] and DeepSpeed [64]. For efficient inference, we enable
mixed precision in BF16 and batch size at 6. We directly use their
tokenizers and pretrained model weights. We set temperature as
0.1 and top_k and top_p as 1 to get the best summaries. For BinT5,
it only accepts decompiled code, thus we only use it for summarizing decompiled code. We set its inference batch size as 64, using its
maximum context size, i.e., 512.
4 EV ALUATION
In this section, we present our evaluation results. While there are
many research questions (RQ) centered around this measurement,
we seek to answer the following ones:
• RQ1: To what extent can LLMs comprehend binary code? What
input of binary code impacts LLM’s output more?
• RQ2: Which LLM performs the best on binary code comprehension? Which LLM is more efficient than others?
• RQ3: How do the different computer architectures and optimization levels affect LLMs’ performance?
• RQ4: What are additional factors of binary code input influencing LLMs’ comprehension capabilities?
4.1 Evaluation Setup
Evaluation Environments. Our evaluation environments include
a ThinkPad P15 desktop and a Dell cloud server. The ThinkPad
desktop has an Intel i9-10885H vPro CPU (8 cores, 2.4 GHz), 128 GB
RAM, 1TB storage, and an NVIDIA Quadro RTX 4000 Max-Q GPU,
running Windows-11. The Dell cloud server has an AMD EPYC7643 CPU (88 usable cores, 2.3 GHz), 921 GB RAM, 12.8 TB storage,
and 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 80 GB VRAM each, supercharged
by NVLink with the RHEL-8.6 operating system.
Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary
code summarization datasets, completing the tasks in 20 and 6 days,
respectively. GPT-4 tokenized all test samples into 309,401,126 tokens and generated responses totaling 19,678,448 tokens, summing
up to 329,079,574 tokens, as reported in the first row of Table 1.
For ChatGPT, the input samples were tokenized into 296,524,698
tokens, and it generated 16,338,012 tokens, resulting in a total of
312,862,710 tokens. In terms of the cost, we spent $10,462.74 and
$954.93 US dollars for querying GPT-4 and ChatGPT models, respectively. For Llama 2 and Code Llama models, they tokenize our input
samples into 736,413,994 tokens and generate 33,195,771, 29,699,869,
40,016,196, and 33,323,576 tokens as responses. The execution of
Llama models takes us 857 GPU hours to finish. Finally, BinT5 produced 326,007,985 tokens, including 326,007,985 input and 8,456,320
output tokens within 16 GPU hours. To sum up, the model execution
costs 11,418 US dollars and 873 NVIDIA A100 GPU hours.
4.2 RQ1: Effectiveness
To answer RQ1, we first evaluate the performance of LLMs on different representations of binary code, including decompiled code,
IR code, assembly code, and raw bytes along with source code, and
present the results in Figure 6, in which BinT5’s performance is
not included for a fair comparison, as it only accepts decompiled
code. Among the different code representations, we find that LLMs
perform the best in source code, achieving an average semantic
similarity score of 0.474. For decompiled code, we observe a significant performance degradation when symbols are stripped from
binaries, reducing the semantic similarity score from 0.449 to 0.202
(55.0% decrease).

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | Unnamed: 6 | # of Tokens | Unnamed: 7 | Unnamed: 8
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Model | Unnamed: 1: Creator | Unnamed: 2: # Parameters | Unnamed: 3: Modality | Unnamed: 4: # Max Tokens | Unnamed: 5: Access | Unnamed: 6: | # of Tokens: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: Cost
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: Input | # of Tokens: Output | Unnamed: 7: Total | Unnamed: 8:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=2]
Columns: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary
Row 1: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: 0.1. Furthermore, we set both top_p and n at 1 to obtain the top-1 re- | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: code summarization datasets, completing the tasks in 20 and 6 days,
Row 2: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: sults [16]. Regarding the parameters stop and max_tokens, we opt | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: respectively. GPT-4 tokenized all test samples into 309,401,126 toRow 3: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: for the default values [16], allowing the models to autonomously | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: kens and generated responses totaling 19,678,448 tokens, summing
Row 4: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: determine when to conclude their responses. To enhance inference | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: up to 329,079,574 tokens, as reported in the first row of Table 1.
Row 5: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: speed, we have implemented multi-threading, utilizing five and | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: For ChatGPT, the input samples were tokenized into 296,524,698
Row 6: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: six parallel threads for GPT-4 and ChatGPT, respectively, while | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: tokens, and it generated 16,338,012 tokens, resulting in a total of
Row 7: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: ensuring compliance with the rate limits set by OpenAI [22]. | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: 312,862,710 tokens. In terms of the cost, we spent $10,462.74 and
Row 8: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: We have donwloaded Llamamodels fromHuggingface, including | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: $954.93 US dollars for querying GPT-4 and ChatGPTmodels, respecRow 9: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf, meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-chat-hf, | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: tively. For Llama 2 and Code Llama models, they tokenize our input
Row 10: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: codellama/CodeLlama-7b-Instruct-hf, and codellama/CodeLlama- | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: samples into 736,413,994 tokens and generate 33,195,771, 29,699,869,
Row 11: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: 13b-Instruct-hf [5, 12]. To run these models, we implemented an in- | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: 40,016,196, and 33,323,576 tokens as responses. The execution of
Row 12: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: ference framework based on Pytorch [56], transformers [78], Scikit- | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: Llama models takes us 857 GPU hours to finish. Finally, BinT5 proRow 13: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: learn [58] and DeepSpeed [64]. For efficient inference, we enable | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: duced 326,007,985 tokens, including 326,007,985 input and 8,456,320
Row 14: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: mixed precision in BF16 and batch size at 6. We directly use their | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: output tokens within 16 GPU hours. To sum up, themodel execution
Row 15: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: tokenizers and pretrained model weights. We set temperature as | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: costs 11,418 US dollars and 873 NVIDIA A100 GPU hours.
Row 16: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: 0.1 and top_k and top_p as 1 to get the best summaries. For BinT5, | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary:
Row 17: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: it only accepts decompiled code, thus we only use it for summariz- | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary:
Row 18: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: 4.2 RQ1: Effectiveness
Row 19: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: ing decompiled code. We set its inference batch size as 64, using its | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary:
Row 20: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: maximum context size, i.e., 512. | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: To answer RQ1, we first evaluate the performance of LLMs on difRow 21: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: ferent representations of binary code, including decompiled code,
Row 22: rameter [16], controlling models’ diversity and creative output, to: 4 EVALUATION | Model Execution. We ran GPT-4 and ChatGPT on our binary: IR code, assembly code, and raw bytes along with source code, and
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
(a) BLEU
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
(b) METEOR
SourceDecompiled (Debug)Decompiled (Stripped) IR AssemblyBytes0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
(c) ROUGE-L
SourceDecompiled (Debug)Decompiled (Stripped) IR AssemblyBytes
0.0
0.5
(d) Semantic Similarity
Figure 6: LLM Performance across Code Representations. For
decompiled code, “debug” and “stripped” refer to these with
and without debugging symbols.
Result 1 (R1) – Stripping debugging symbols significantly loses
decompiled code semantics by 55.0%.
Even with such a significant information loss, decompiled code
without symbols still outperforms other binary code representations. Specifically, the average semantic similarity scores of assembly code, IR code, and raw bytes are 0.188, 0.185, and 0.118, respectively. The same trend also appears in other evaluation metrics,e.g.,
the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and
0.023 for source code, decompiled code (debug), decompiled code
(stripped), IR code, assembly code, and raw bytes, respectively.
Result 2 ( R2) – LLMs perform the best on decompiled code
compared to IR code, assembly code, and raw bytes.
After obtaining the statistical results, we also conduct an indepth study to understand to which extent LLMs can comprehend
binary code, as well as the nuanced interpretation of specific score
outcomes. The result of this study is presented in Appendix §A.6
for readers of interest. At a high level, our case studies of LLMgenerated summaries provide additional confirmation of the deterioration of binary code semantics caused by symbol stripping
(F1). Furthermore, rather than elucidating high-level functionalities,
LLMs tend to generate operational summaries for low-level binary
representations, i.e., IR and assembly code (F2). In the case of raw
bytes, it is intriguing to note that the LLM-generated summaries
closely resemble those of the assembly code, indicating the implicit
code-lifting behavior (F3). And, compared to exact matching-based
metrics, our proposed semantic evaluation metric has been shown
to be better suited for our task, as it effectively captures summary
semantics (F4).
4.3 RQ2: LLM Comparison
To answer RQ2, we study individual performance for each of our
target LLMs. Having identified that decompiled code is the best for
LLMs to understand binary code (R2), our report emphasizes the
0.0
0.2
0.4 (a) BLEU
0.0
0.2
0.4
(b) METEOR
GPT-4ChatGPTCode-Llama-7BCode-Llama-13BLlama-2-7BLlama-2-13BBinT5
0.0
0.2
0.4
(c) ROUGE-L
GPT-4ChatGPTCode-Llama-7BCode-Llama-13BLlama-2-7BLlama-2-13BBinT5
0.0
0.5
1.0 (d) Semantic Similarity
Debug
Stripped
Figure 7: Performance across Different LLMs for Binaries
with (Debug) and without (Stripped) Symbols
performance of LLMs on decompiled code, as shown in Figure 7.
For decompiled code with symbols, we find that ChatGPT performs
the best, achieving an average semantic similarity score of 0.543.
Meanwhile, for stripped binaries, Code Llama models outperform all
other LLMs achieving 0.284 and 0.283 average semantic similarity
scores for 7B and 13B models. It is a surprise that GPT-4 is not
the best-performing model. Therefore, we delve into a thorough
examination of its results. Overall, we observe that GPT-4 can
understand binary code. However, it places a greater emphasis
on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,
resulting in noisy summaries (F5). A more detailed analysis and
specific examples are provided in Appendix §A.7.
Result 3 ( R3) – ChatGPT and Code Llama perform the best
for decompiled code with and without symbols, respectively,
compared to GPT-4, Llama 2, and BinT5.
Code Llama is fine-tuned on the code corpora from Llama 2 [66].
For decompiled code with symbols, Code Llama achieves 4.57%, and
11.3% better performance than Llama 2 on the 7B and 13B models.
For decompiled code from stripped binaries, Code Llama models
further outclass Llama 2 model by 12.3% and 22.0% on the 7B and
13B models. This outperformance of Code Llama demonstrates that
Code Llama’s fine-tuning can improve its capacity for binary code
comprehension. Meanwhile, BinT5 is the model fine-tuned from
the CodeT5 model by retraining on decompiled code [23]. Unfortunately, BinT5-generated summaries receive the lowest semantic
similarity scores, i.e., 0.115 and 0.114, on binaries with and without
symbols, compared to all other LLMs. It is worth noting that for
a fair and unbiased comparison among LLMs, we have excluded
test samples that exist in BinT5’s training dataset (See §A.8 for
more discussions). The marginal performance difference in binaries
with and without symbols for BinT5 suggests that it may not fully
capture the intricate semantics within binary code, even with symbols. More importantly, we hypothesize that the different impact
of fine-tuning in Code Llama and BinT5 may stem from disparities
in their underlying base models, namely Llama 2 and CodeT5.

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | 0.4 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 0.4: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Stripped
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: 0.6 | Unnamed: 1: 0.75 | 0.4: | Unnamed: 2: 0.4 | Unnamed: 3:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: 0.4 | Unnamed: 1: 0.5 | 0.4: 0.2 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 0.4: | Unnamed: 2: 0.2 | Unnamed: 3:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: 0.2 | Unnamed: 1: 0.25 | 0.4: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 0.4: 0.0 | Unnamed: 2: 0.0 | Unnamed: 3:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: 0.0 | Unnamed: 1: 0.0 | 0.4: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=8 index=2]
Columns: 0.75 | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | Unnamed: 6 | Unnamed: 7 | Unnamed: 8 | Unnamed: 9 | Unnamed: 10 | Unnamed: 11 | Unnamed: 12 | Unnamed: 13 | Unnamed: 14 | Unnamed: 15 | Unnamed: 16 | Unnamed: 17 | Unnamed: 18 | Unnamed: 19 | Unnamed: 20 | Unnamed: 21 | Unnamed: 22 | 1.0
Row 1: 0.75: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: | Unnamed: 19: | Unnamed: 20: | Unnamed: 21: | Unnamed: 22: 0.4 | 1.0:
Row 2: 0.75: 0.5 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: 0.5 | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: | Unnamed: 19: | Unnamed: 20: | Unnamed: 21: | Unnamed: 22: | 1.0:
Row 3: 0.75: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: | Unnamed: 19: | Unnamed: 20: | Unnamed: 21: | Unnamed: 22: | 1.0: 0.5
Row 4: 0.75: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: | Unnamed: 19: | Unnamed: 20: | Unnamed: 21: | Unnamed: 22: 0.2 | 1.0:
Row 5: 0.75: 0.25 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: | Unnamed: 19: | Unnamed: 20: | Unnamed: 21: | Unnamed: 22: | 1.0:
Row 6: 0.75: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: 0.0 | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: | Unnamed: 19: | Unnamed: 20: | Unnamed: 21: | Unnamed: 22: | 1.0:
Row 7: 0.75: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: | Unnamed: 19: | Unnamed: 20: | Unnamed: 21: | Unnamed: 22: | 1.0: 0.0
Row 8: 0.75: 0.0 | Unnamed: 0: 0.0So u | Unnamed: 1: De c | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: De c | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: I DR | Unnamed: 6: As s | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: By t | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: So u | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: e | Unnamed: 13: c | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: De c | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: IR | Unnamed: 18: A ss | Unnamed: 19: | Unnamed: 20: Byt | Unnamed: 21: | Unnamed: 22: | 1.0:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=8 index=3]
Columns: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,
Row 1: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: 0.023 for source code, decompiled code (debug), decompiled code | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,: resulting in noisy summaries (F5). A more detailed analysis and
Row 2: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: (stripped), IR code, assembly code, and raw bytes, respectively. | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,: specific examples are provided in Appendix §A.7.
Row 3: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: Result 2 (R2) – LLMs perform the best on decompiled code | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,: Result 3 (R3) – ChatGPT and Code Llama perform the best
Row 4: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: compared to IR code, assembly code, and raw bytes. | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,: for decompiled code with and without symbols, respectively,
Row 5: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,: compared to GPT-4, Llama 2, and BinT5.
Row 6: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: After obtaining the statistical results, we also conduct an in- | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,:
Row 7: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: depth study to understand to which extent LLMs can comprehend | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,: Code Llama is fine-tuned on the code corpora from Llama 2 [66].
Row 8: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: binary code, as well as the nuanced interpretation of specific score | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,: For decompiled code with symbols, Code Llama achieves 4.57%, and
Row 9: the mean METEOR scores are 0.167, 0.141, 0.102, 0.052, 0.066, and: outcomes. The result of this study is presented in Appendix §A.6 | on the intricate and superfluous details, compared to ChatGPT,: 11.3% better performance than Llama 2 on the 7B and 13B models.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
Table 2: Efficiency of LLMs - Inference Time per Sample
ChatGPT GPT-4 Llama 2 Code Llama BinT5
7B 13B 7B 13B
Inference
Time (Sec) 1.07 3.1 0.83 1.12 1.29 1.72 0.22
Result 4 ( R4) – Code Llama, fine-tuned from Llama 2, consistently outperforms Llama 2 (up to 22.0% better scores). However,
BinT5, fine-tuned from CodeT5, unfortunately, achieves the
worst performance among all LLMs.
As listed in Table 1, different LLMs have different model sizes
and parameters, which can potentially lead to different efficiency.
Thus, we evaluate and compare the inference time cost per sample of our target models. Table 2 presents the average inference
time per sample for different LLMs. Here, we have two different
evaluation settings as stated in the model execution section of §4.1.
For ChatGPT and GPT-4, their execution relies on OpenAI API
calls, making it challenging to determine the computational infrastructure that underpins their operation. Their direct comparison
shows that ChatGPT is 2.9× faster than GPT-4. For other models,
we have run them on our own cloud server which gives us a fair
comparison. Among these models, BinT5 is the fastest one among
all models, e.g., 7.8× faster than Code Llama (13B). We also find that
Code Llama takes more time for inference compared to Llama 2,
e.g., 1.5× more time on the 13B models. In addition to the time cost,
we have also observed the memory consumption difference among
the open-source LLMs. Specifically, the 7B and 13B Llama models
occupy 42.6GB and 61.9GB of GPU VRAM, respectively, while the
BinT5 model only takes 3.4GB of VRAM.
Result 5 ( R5) – Compared to GPT-4, ChatGPT is 2.9 × faster.
For the other LLMs, BinT5 is the fastest model, while Llama 2 is
(up to 1.5×) faster than Code Llama.
4.4 RQ3: Various Binaries
To answer RQ3, we first study LLMs’ performance on binaries
across different computer architectures. Figure 8 presents the performance on binaries across different architectures, i.e., x86, x64,
ARM, and MIPS. For binaries with symbols, the average semantic
similarity scores for x86, x64, ARM, and MIPS binaries are 0.483,
0.503, 0.497, and 0.485, respectively. The performance on x64 binaries outclasses these on x86 binaries by 4.14%. For stripped binaries,
the similarity scores are 0.262, 0.299, 0.276, and 0.304 for the x86, x64,
ARM, and MIPS binaries, respectively, in which LLMs’ performance
on MIPS binaries is 16.0% better than these of x86 binaries.
Result 6 ( R6) – LLMs perform the best on x64 binaries with
symbols and MIPS stripped binaries. The cross-architecture
performance gap can be up to 16.0%.
In Figure 9, we present the performance of LLMs when applied
to binaries with O0, O1, O2, and O3 optimization levels. For binaries
with symbols, LLMs attain average text similarity scores of 0.481,
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4 (a) BLEU
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4 (b) METEOR
x86 x64 ARM MIPS
0.0
0.2
0.4
(c) ROUGE-L
x86 x64 ARM MIPS-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00 (d) Semantic Similarity
Debug
Stripped
Figure 8: Performance across Computer Architectures for
Binaries with (Debug) and without (Stripped) Symbols
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4 (a) BLEU
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4 (b) METEOR
O0 O1 O2 O3
0.0
0.2
0.4
(c) ROUGE-L
O0 O1 O2 O3-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00 (d) Semantic Similarity
Debug
Stripped
Figure 9: Performance across Optimization Levels for Binaries with (Debug) and without (Stripped) Symbols
0.477, 0.477, and 0.474 for O0, O1, O2, and O3 binaries, respectively.
Conversely, for stripped binaries, the average text similarity scores
for these binary optimization levels are 0.269, 0.268, 0.266, and 0.270.
In both categories of binaries, we notice only a slight variance in
performance across different optimization levels, with the performance gap between O0 and O3 binaries amounting to merely 1.47%.
Result 7 ( R7) – LLMs show marginal performance gap across
different optimization levels, e.g., 1.47% different text similarity
scores between O0 and O3 binaries.
4.5 RQ4: Other Factors
Since we have identified that the decompiled code is the best for
LLMs to understand (R2), next we undertake a further investigation
of which decompiler generates the optimal output for code comprehension to answer RQ4. Figure 10 presents the LLMs’ performance
on decompiled code generated from three different decompilers.

[TABLE page=9 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | 0.4 | 0.4.1 | Unnamed: 6
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 6: Stripped
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 0.4: 0.3 | 0.4.1: 0.3 | Unnamed: 6:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Llama 2 | Unnamed: 4: Code Llama | Unnamed: 5: | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 6:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ChatGPT | Unnamed: 2: GPT-4 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: BinT5 | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 6:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 7B 13B | Unnamed: 4: 7B 13B | Unnamed: 5: | 0.4: 0.2 | 0.4.1: 0.2 | Unnamed: 6:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: Inference | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 0.4: 0.1 | 0.4.1: 0.1 | Unnamed: 6:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: 1.07 | Unnamed: 2: 3.1 | Unnamed: 3: 0.83 1.12 | Unnamed: 4: 1.29 1.72 | Unnamed: 5: 0.22 | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 6:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: Time (Sec) | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 6:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | 0.4: 0.0 | 0.4.1: 0.0 | Unnamed: 6:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=9 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | 0.4 | 0.4.1 | Unnamed: 1
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 1: Stripped
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: calls, making it challenging to determine the computational infras- | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | 0.4: 0.3 | 0.4.1: 0.3 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: tructure that underpins their operation. Their direct comparison | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: shows that ChatGPT is 2.9× faster than GPT-4. For other models, | 0.4: 0.2 | 0.4.1: 0.2 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: we have run them on our own cloud server which gives us a fair | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | 0.4: 0.1 | 0.4.1: 0.1 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: comparison. Among these models, BinT5 is the fastest one among | 0.4: | 0.4.1: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: all models, e.g., 7.8× faster than Code Llama (13B). We also find that | 0.4: 0.0 | 0.4.1: 0.0 | Unnamed: 1:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=9 index=3]
Columns: ple of our target models. Table 2 presents the average inference | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1
Row 1: ple of our target models. Table 2 presents the average inference: | Unnamed: 0: Binaries with (Debug) and without (Stripped) Symbols | Unnamed: 1:
Row 2: ple of our target models. Table 2 presents the average inference: time per sample for different LLMs. Here, we have two different | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 3: ple of our target models. Table 2 presents the average inference: evaluation settings as stated in the model execution section of §4.1. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 4: ple of our target models. Table 2 presents the average inference: For ChatGPT and GPT-4, their execution relies on OpenAI API | Unnamed: 0: (a) BLEU 0.4 0.4(b) METEOR | Unnamed: 1: Debug
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 10]
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4 (a) BLEU
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4 (b) METEOR
Ghidra Hex-rays Angr
0.0
0.2
0.4
(c) ROUGE-L
Ghidra Hex-rays Angr-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00 (d) Semantic Similarity
Debug
Stripped
Figure 10: Performance across Different Decompilers for Binaries with (Debug) and without (Stripped) Symbols
Overall, we find that Hex-rays consistently outperforms the other
two decompilers for both binaries with and without symbols. Specifically, for binaries with symbols, the output of Hex-rays achieves
5.41% and 21.9% higher semantic similarity scores than those of
Ghidra and Angr. For stripped binaries, it further outclasses Ghidra
and Angr by 60.7% and 19.8%, respectively. Among the decompilers, we observe that Angr is significantly slower than others. For
instance, Angr requires about 15× more decompilation time than
Ghira with setting the CFGFast analysis for Angr, while Ghidra
and Hex-rays consume the comparable time for the same task.
Result 8 (R8) – The decompiled code output of Hex-rays obtains
the best scores compared to those of Ghidra and Angr, achieving
up to 60.7% outperformance.
Observing the performance decline from symbol stripping (R1),
we delve deeper to discern which among the three symbol types—data
types, variable names, and function names—most influence decompiled code semantics. Starting with the original decompiled code
with all symbols as our baseline, we exclusively strip each symbol
type by substituting them with non-informative placeholders (detailed in §A.9). This produces three sets of modified decompiled
code, with each having only one symbol type replaced while the
rest remains intact. Additionally, we use the decompiled code from
stripped binaries as an all-symbol-removed benchmark. Figure 11
showcases the LLMs’ performance across these variations. Stripping
just the function names led to the most substantial drop in performance—a 30.3% decrease in semantic similarity. Variable names and
data types caused reductions of 30.0% and 19.5%, respectively. Moreover, we also find that the semantics of LLM-generated summaries
can be manipulated by intentionally modified function names. For
this, we perform a case study and identify a vulnerability of LLMgenerated summaries by function name manipulation (F6) in §A.10.
Result 9 ( R9) – Function name contributes the most to decompiled code semantics. Merely stripping function names can
reduce LLM’s performance by 30.3%.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8 (a) BLEU
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
(b) METEOR
Originalw/o Func Namew/o Var Namew/o Data Typew/o All0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(c) ROUGE-L
Originalw/o Func Namew/o Var Namew/o Data Typew/o All
0.0
0.5
1.0 (d) Semantic Similarity
Figure 11: Semantic Impact of Stripping Function Names,
Variable Names, and Data Types. We exclusively strip function names (w/o Func Name), variable names (w/o Var Name),
and data types (w/o Type) from the decompiled code which
originally has all symbols (Original). The baseline is decompiled code from stripped binaries (w/o All)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3 (a) BLEU
0.0
0.1
0.2
(b) METEOR
Zero-shot Few-shot Chain-of-thought0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
(c) ROUGE-L
Zero-shot Few-shot Chain-of-thought
0.0
0.5
(d) Semantic Similarity
Figure 12: Performance on Different Prompts
In our study, we predominantly employ zero-shot prompts. However, we have also observed the use of advanced prompts, e.g., fewshot and chain-of-thought prompts, in NLP tasks [46]; therefore,
we investigate if these prompts can help LLMs in our task. Fundamentally, the few-shot prompts add demonstration examples (as
shown in Figure 15b in Appendix), e.g., pairs of binary code and
corresponding summaries, to LLM input [27]. For chain-of-thought
prompting [77], we send two queries to LLMs (as exemplified in
Figure 15c). In the first query, LLMs are first asked to explain the
test code with the popular reasoning prompt “Let’s think step by
step”. The resulting explanation is extracted and used to summarize
the test code in the second query. We provide more details of how
we construct these prompts in §A.11.

[TABLE page=10 index=1]
Columns: 0.4 | 0.4.1 | 0.8Stripped | 1.00
Row 1: 0.4: 0.3 | 0.4.1: 0.3 | 0.8Stripped: 0.6 | 1.00: 0.75
Row 2: 0.4: 0.2 | 0.4.1: 0.2 | 0.8Stripped: 0.4 | 1.00: 0.5
Row 3: 0.4: 0.1 | 0.4.1: 0.1 | 0.8Stripped: 0.2 | 1.00: 0.25
Row 4: 0.4: 0.0 | 0.4.1: 0.0 | 0.8Stripped: | 1.00:
Row 5: 0.4: | 0.4.1: | 0.8Stripped: 0.0 | 1.00: 0.0
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=10 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | 0.3 | Unnamed: 1
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: and Angr by 60.7% and 19.8%, respectively. Among the decompil- | 0.3: | Unnamed: 1: 0.2
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: ers, we observe that Angr is significantly slower than others. For | 0.3: 0.2 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: instance, Angr requires about 15× more decompilation time than | 0.3: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | 0.3: | Unnamed: 1: 0.1
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Ghira with setting the CFGFast analysis for Angr, while Ghidra | 0.3: 0.1 | Unnamed: 1:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: and Hex-rays consume the comparable time for the same task. | 0.3: | Unnamed: 1:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 11]
Zero-shot Few-shot Chain-of-thought0
6000Prompt Length
Figure 13: Prompt Length Distribution of Different Prompt
Engineering Techniques
Figure 12 presents the performance of different prompts, where
zero-shot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought prompts achieve average
semantic similarity scores of 0.282, 0.312, and 0.271, respectively.
Compared to zero-shot prompts, few-shot prompts improve LLM
performance by 10.6%, while chain-of-thought reasoning does not
help. Beyond disparities in performance, we have also noted substantial variations in cost. Figure 13 presents the length distribution of different prompts, where the median numbers of tokens for
zero-shot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought prompts are 244, 1,763,
and 944, respectively. The 7.23 × more tokens of few-shot prompts
mean significantly higher computational cost. For instance, since
the use of ChatGPT and GPT-4 is changed based on token numbers,
few-shot prompts would cost us 82,552 US dollars to finish the same
amount of tokens listed in Table 1. Taking into account the scale of
our evaluations, zero-shot learning can be a better solution based
on the balance of performance and cost.
Result 10 ( R10) – Zero-shot prompts are better than few-shot
and chain-of-thought prompts when jointly considering both
performance and cost for our large-scale task.
5 LESSONS LEARNT
Prioritizing Binary Code Comprehension is Paramount. The
need for binary code summarization, albeit an area still in its infancy [ 23], has rapidly grown, with rising demand for natural
language summaries of binary code [ 9, 10, 20]. Notable entities
like VirusTotal [ 20], Google Cloud [ 9], and Microsoft Security
Copilot [10] are increasingly leveraging LLMs to understand malware/threats, aiming to produce ready-to-use summaries to security
professionals. Yet, binary code comprehension remains a formidable challenge, especially for stripped binaries. In our studies, LLMs
either fail to grasp the complete semantics (F1) or generate summaries missing the nuances of high-level code semantics (F2). The
multifaceted nature of binaries, along with their diverse representations, compounds this challenge. For instance, LLM performance
varies across binary representations ( R2) and is sensitive to decompiler outputs (R8). Additionally, differing compilation settings,
such as computer architectures, can influence LLM outcomes (R6).
In navigating this intricate landscape, our findings offer pivotal
insights that can guide future endeavours in comprehensively understanding binary code.
Harnessing LLMs Requires Further Advancements and Explorations. Machine learning models are extensively utilized in
binary analysis, yet many face challenges in generalizing to unseen
samples [28, 40]. In contrast, LLMs like ChatGPT and GPT-4 boast
superior generalizability—crucial for the vast array of real-world
binaries. However, these promising models come with limitations.
They are resource-intensive, with GPT and Llama models demanding expensive computational resources and specialized hardware
accelerators (§4.3). Potential solutions may lie in model distillation
and hardware acceleration techniques [32], especially as smaller
models have proven to be more resource-friendly (R5). The blackbox nature of LLMs presents another challenge, making it tricky to
decipher their exact behaviors. Yet, our work suggests that refining
and optimizing prompts might be a pathway forward, as highlighted
by our prompt evaluations (Table 5 and R10). Additionally, while
fine-tuning LLMs can enhance binary code comprehension, selecting the right base models is essential, as underscored by our findings in R4. In essence, while LLMs hold immense promise in binary
code analysis, their effective deployment hinges on computational
challenges, requiring selecting the correct models and inputs.
Augmenting Decompilers is Crucial for Improved Binary
Comprehension. Our studies indicate that decompiled code proves
most intuitive for LLMs (R2). Enhancing decompilers, particularly
for stripped binaries, cannot be overstated. Our findings suggest
that binary stripping can greatly diminish the semantics of decompiled code (R1). Furthermore, aside from BinT5 [23], all other LLMs
exhibit a significant performance gap for binaries with and without
symbols (Figure 7). This leads to LLMs’ inability to fully capture the
semantics of stripped binary functions (F1). A promising approach
to strengthen decompilers can be symbol recovery [25, 28, 40], as
depicted in Figure 11. Our research pinpoints function name prediction [31, 40, 57] as particularly influential, given its paramount
contribution to the semantics of decompiled code (R9). The consistency check of binary function names is also important, particularly
because LLM-generated summaries are susceptible to malicious
manipulation through intentional alterations of function names
(F6). Currently, Hex-Rays stands out as a leading decompiler, consistently producing output that LLMs perform the best on ( R8).
Moving forward, we believe that the insights from our study can
serve as invaluable guidance for improving decompilers.
6 THREATS TO V ALIDITY
Scope of Study and Binary Diversity. In this study, we have
performed an extensive study of LLM’s capabilities for binary code
comprehension, assessing over 557K binary functions across different architectures and optimization levels. However, real-world
binaries extend beyond the confines of our dataset, encompassing domain-centric binaries like IoT firmware and malware. Such
binaries often possess unique semantics which might be further
complicated by code obfuscations. Moreover, while our study has
assessed specific binary code representations, it does not encompass
all possible representations, such as those generated by other decompilers or IR code generators. Delving into these areas presents
a promising avenue for future research.

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: 6000 | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | Unnamed: 6 | Unnamed: 7 | Unnamed: 8 | Unnamed: 9 | Unnamed: 10 | Unnamed: 11 | Unnamed: 12 | Unnamed: 13 | Unnamed: 14 | Unnamed: 15 | Unnamed: 16 | Unnamed: 17 | Unnamed: 18
Row 1: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: derstanding binary code.
Row 2: 6000: 4000 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: Harnessing LLMs Requires Further Advancements and ExRow 3: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: plorations. Machine learning models are extensively utilized in
Row 4: 6000: 2000 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: binary analysis, yet many face challenges in generalizing to unseen
Row 5: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: samples [28, 40]. In contrast, LLMs like ChatGPT and GPT-4 boast
Row 6: 6000: 0 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: superior generalizability—crucial for the vast array of real-world
Row 7: 6000: Ze ro | Unnamed: 0: - | Unnamed: 1: binaries. However, these promising models come with limitations.sh | Unnamed: 2: -o t | Unnamed: 3: Fe w | Unnamed: 4: - | Unnamed: 5: s | Unnamed: 6: h | Unnamed: 7: ot | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: Ch | Unnamed: 10: a | Unnamed: 11: in | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: o | Unnamed: 14: f-thou | Unnamed: 15: ght | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: They are resource-intensive, with GPT and Llama models demand-ing expensive computational resources and specialized hardware
Row 8: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: accelerators (§4.3). Potential solutions may lie in model distillation
Row 9: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: and hardware acceleration techniques [32], especially as smaller
Row 10: 6000: Figure 13: Prompt Length Distribution of Different Prompt | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 11: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: models have proven to be more resource-friendly (R5). The blackRow 12: 6000: Engineering Techniques | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 13: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: box nature of LLMs presents another challenge, making it tricky to
Row 14: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: decipher their exact behaviors. Yet, our work suggests that refining
Row 15: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: and optimizing promptsmight be a pathway forward, as highlighted
Row 16: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: by our prompt evaluations (Table 5 and R10). Additionally, while
Row 17: 6000: Figure 12 presents the performance of different prompts, where | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 18: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: fine-tuning LLMs can enhance binary code comprehension, selectRow 19: 6000: zero-shot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought prompts achieve average | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 20: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: ing the right base models is essential, as underscored by our findRow 21: 6000: semantic similarity scores of 0.282, 0.312, and 0.271, respectively. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 22: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: ings in R4. In essence, while LLMs hold immense promise in binary
Row 23: 6000: Compared to zero-shot prompts, few-shot prompts improve LLM | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 24: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: code analysis, their effective deployment hinges on computational
Row 25: 6000: performance by 10.6%, while chain-of-thought reasoning does not | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 26: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: challenges, requiring selecting the correct models and inputs.
Row 27: 6000: help. Beyond disparities in performance, we have also noted sub- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 28: 6000: stantial variations in cost. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: Figure 13 presents the length distribu- | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: Augmenting Decompilers is Crucial for Improved Binary
Row 29: 6000: tion of different prompts, where the median numbers of tokens for | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: Comprehension.Our studies indicate that decompiled code proves
Row 30: 6000: zero-shot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought prompts are 244, 1,763, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: most intuitive for LLMs (R2). Enhancing decompilers, particularly
Row 31: 6000: and 944, respectively. The 7.23× more tokens of few-shot prompts | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: for stripped binaries, cannot be overstated. Our findings suggest
Row 32: 6000: mean significantly higher computational cost. For instance, since | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: that binary stripping can greatly diminish the semantics of decomRow 33: 6000: the use of ChatGPT and GPT-4 is changed based on token numbers, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: piled code (R1). Furthermore, aside from BinT5 [23], all other LLMs
Row 34: 6000: few-shot prompts would cost us 82,552 US dollars to finish the same | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: exhibit a significant performance gap for binaries with and without
Row 35: 6000: amount of tokens listed in Table 1. Taking into account the scale of | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: symbols (Figure 7). This leads to LLMs’ inability to fully capture the
Row 36: 6000: our evaluations, zero-shot learning can be a better solution based | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: semantics of stripped binary functions (F1). A promising approach
Row 37: 6000: on the balance of performance and cost. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: to strengthen decompilers can be symbol recovery [25, 28, 40], as
Row 38: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: depicted in Figure 11. Our research pinpoints function name preRow 39: 6000: Result 10 (R10) – Zero-shot prompts are better than few-shot | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: diction [31, 40, 57] as particularly influential, given its paramount
Row 40: 6000: and chain-of-thought prompts when jointly considering both | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: contribution to the semantics of decompiled code (R9). The consisRow 41: 6000: performance and cost for our large-scale task. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: tency check of binary function names is also important, particularly
Row 42: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: because LLM-generated summaries are susceptible to malicious
Row 43: 6000: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: manipulation through intentional alterations of function names
Row 44: 6000: 5 LESSONS LEARNT | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: (F6). Currently, Hex-Rays stands out as a leading decompiler, conRow 45: 6000: Prioritizing Binary Code Comprehension is Paramount. The | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: sistently producing output that LLMs perform the best on (R8).
Row 46: 6000: need for binary code summarization, albeit an area still in its in- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: Moving forward, we believe that the insights from our study can
Row 47: 6000: fancy [23], has rapidly grown, with rising demand for natural | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: serve as invaluable guidance for improving decompilers.
Row 48: 6000: language summaries of binary code [9, 10, 20]. Notable entities | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18:
Row 49: 6000: like VirusTotal [20], Google Cloud [9], and Microsoft Security | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: 6 THREATS TO VALIDITY
Row 50: 6000: Copilot [10] are increasingly leveraging LLMs to understand mal- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: Scope of Study and Binary Diversity. In this study, we have
Row 51: 6000: ware/threats, aiming to produce ready-to-use summaries to security | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: performed an extensive study of LLM’s capabilities for binary code
Row 52: 6000: professionals. Yet, binary code comprehension remains a formida- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: comprehension, assessing over 557K binary functions across difRow 53: 6000: ble challenge, especially for stripped binaries. In our studies, LLMs | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: ferent architectures and optimization levels. However, real-world
Row 54: 6000: either fail to grasp the complete semantics (F1) or generate sum- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: binaries extend beyond the confines of our dataset, encompassRow 55: 6000: maries missing the nuances of high-level code semantics (F2). The | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: ing domain-centric binaries like IoT firmware and malware. Such
Row 56: 6000: multifaceted nature of binaries, along with their diverse represen- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: binaries often possess unique semantics which might be further
Row 57: 6000: tations, compounds this challenge. For instance, LLM performance | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: complicated by code obfuscations. Moreover, while our study has
Row 58: 6000: varies across binary representations (R2) and is sensitive to de- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: assessed specific binary code representations, it does not encompass
Row 59: 6000: compiler outputs (R8). Additionally, differing compilation settings, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: all possible representations, such as those generated by other deRow 60: 6000: such as computer architectures, can influence LLM outcomes (R6). | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: | Unnamed: 16: | Unnamed: 17: | Unnamed: 18: compilers or IR code generators. Delving into these areas presents
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 12]
Emergence of New LLMs and Prompt Techniques. Our study
evaluated four leading LLMs recognized for their exceptional performance across numerous tasks [ 51, 66], as well as the binary
code summarization model, BinT5 [23]. Still, with academia and
industry ceaselessly advancing, newer LLMs are continually being
introduced, and these might be applicable for our task. Additionally,
while our research employed a prompt synthesis and optimization
method yielding 320 prompts (§4.1), there remains potential for
discovering even more effective prompts and refining prompt engineering methodologies, like gradient-based prompt tuning [46].
Code Summary and Semantic Representations. In our research,
developer-written code comments served as our gold standard for
code summaries. Alternative representations for these summaries
exist as well, such as analysis logs or system calls [ 36, 53]. However, these representations are artificial, generated by third parties
instead of the code creators, and might not always align semantically with the original code. We observe that developers’ comments present a more intuitive option. This aligns with conventional methodologies utilized in prior studies [23, 33, 38]. Similar
to well-known code summary datasets, e.g., CodeSearchNet [38],
our dataset may also include semantic inconsistent noise [29] introduced by developers. While mitigating this noise is still an open
question, this would be a worthwhile focus for subsequent research.
7 RELATED WORK
LLM for Binary Reverse Engineering. Binary reverse engineering is labor-intensive and suffers from the absence of high-level
semantics, especially for stripped binaries. Existing LLM-based solutions follow the pretraining-finetuning paradigm to learn binary
semantics from large binary corpora and transfer the learned knowledge to downstream tasks, e.g., function similarity detection [43,
62, 74], variable name and type inference [ 25, 28, 59], and function name prediction [31, 40, 57]. For example, Trex [62] pretrains
roBERTa on the assembly code and execution trace to detect function similarity. SymLM [40] predicts function names by learning
calling context and execution behavior. Unlike existing works that
focus on BERT-level LLMs, we focus on generative LLMs that exhibit significantly better generalizability and emergent abilities [76].
Automated Code Summarization. Automated code summarization aims at articulating code fragments, typically methods or functions, using natural language summaries [ 67]. Recently, the predominant focus of this research has been on source code [33, 35, 75]
As an example, CodeT5 [75] pretrains the T5 model with semanticsenriched code features, e.g., identifiers, to summarize code. GraphCodeBERT summarizes binary code semantics by modeling the
data flow with the BERT model [ 35]. In addition to source code,
there are also research efforts on binary code. For example, BinT5
finetunes CodeT5 on decompiled code to generate natural language
descriptions [23]. Different from existing research, we are the first
to perform a large-scale and comprehensive study of different LLMs
on the binary code summarization task.
8 CONCLUSION
We have presented a large-scale and comprehensive study of how
LLMs can understand binary code semantics. We built BinSum, a
comprehensive benchmark with an expansive dataset with over
557K binary functions, spanning various code representations, computer architectures, and optimization levels. We construct an extensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary
functions in different binary code representations across different
computer architectures and optimization levels. We designed the
novel in-context prompt synthesis and optimization techniques for
optimal prompt generation. We also devised a new semantic evaluation metric to measure code summaries. Our rigorous evaluations
have resulted in 10 empirical results and 6 findings, which provide
nuanced insights into both LLMs and binary code, serving as a
reference for future research in binary code comprehension.
REFERENCES
[1] angr decompiler. https://docs.angr.io/en/latest/analyses/decompiler.html. Accessed on 10-09-2023.
[2] Capstone - the ultimate disassembler. https://www.capstone-engine.org/. Accessed on 10-09-2023.
[3] Chatgpt: Everything you need to know about openai’s gpt-4 tool. https://www.
sciencefocus.com/future-technology/gpt-3. Accessed on 10-01-2023.
[4] Chroma - the ai-native open-source embedding database. https://www.trychroma.
com/. Accessed on 09-26-2023.
[5] Code llama. https://huggingface.co/codellama. Accessed on 10-01-2023.
[6] Common crawl dataset. https://registry.opendata.aws/commoncrawl/. Accessed
on 10-07-2023.
[7] Darpa cyber grand challenge. https://www.darpa.mil/program/cyber-grandchallenge. Accessed on 10-06-2023.
[8] Gnu software - free software foundation. https://www.gnu.org/software/. Accessed on 10-03-2023.
[9] Introducing ai-powered insights in threat intelligence. https://cloud.google.com/
blog/products/identity-security/rsa-introducing-ai-powered-insights-threatintelligence. Accessed on 10-12-2023.
[10] Introducing microsoft security copilot. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
security/business/ai-machine-learning/microsoft-security-copilot. Accessed
on 10-12-2023.
[11] Introducing virustotal code insight: Empowering threat analysis with generative
ai. https://blog.virustotal.com/2023/04/introducing-virustotal-code-insight.html.
Accessed on 10-08-2023.
[12] Meta llama 2. https://huggingface.co/meta-llama. Accessed on 10-01-2023.
[13] Module ida_hexrays. https://www.hex-rays.com/products/ida/support/
idapython_docs/ida_hexrays.html. Accessed on 10-09-2023.
[14] Module ida_idaapi. https://www.hex-rays.com/products/ida/support/idapython_
docs/ida_idaapi.html. Accessed on 10-09-2023.
[15] Open llm leaderboard. https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_
leaderboard. Accessed on Date of 09-25-2023.
[16] Openai api reference - create chat completion. https://platform.openai.com/docs/
api-reference/chat/create. Accessed on 09-25-2023.
[17] Package ghidra.app.decompiler. https://ghidra.re/ghidra_docs/api/ghidra/app/
decompiler/package-summary.html. Accessed on 10-09-2023.
[18] pyelftools - parsing elf and dwarf in python. https://github.com/eliben/pyelftools.
Accessed on 10-09-2023.
[19] Sentence-transformers - pretrained models. https://www.sbert.net/docs/
pretrained_models.html#pretrained-models. Accessed on 09-26-2023.
[20] Vt code insight: Updates and q&a on purpose, challenges, and evolution. https:
//blog.virustotal.com/2023/05/vt-code-insight-updates-and-q-on.html. Accessed
on 10-12-2023.
[21] Ghidra. https://ghidra-sre.org/, 2023. Accessed on 12-03-2023.
[22] Openai - rate limits. https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits/
overview, Accessed: 2023-09-29.
[23] Ali Al-Kaswan, Toufique Ahmed, Maliheh Izadi, Anand Ashok Sawant, Premkumar Devanbu, and Arie van Deursen. Extending source code pre-trained language
models to summarise decompiled binarie. In 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) , pages 260–271. IEEE,
2023.
[24] Roberto Baldoni, Emilio Coppa, Daniele Cono D’elia, Camil Demetrescu, and
Irene Finocchi. A survey of symbolic execution techniques. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), 51(3):1–39, 2018.
[25] Pratyay Banerjee, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Fish Wang, and Chitta Baral. Variable
name recovery in decompiled binary code using constrained masked language
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12801, 2021.
[26] Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl
workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine translation
and/or summarization, pages 65–72, 2005.

[TABLE page=12 index=1]
Columns: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary
Row 1: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: code summarization model, BinT5 [23]. Still, with academia and | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: functions in different binary code representations across different
Row 2: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: industry ceaselessly advancing, newer LLMs are continually being | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: computer architectures and optimization levels. We designed the
Row 3: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: introduced, and these might be applicable for our task. Additionally, | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: novel in-context prompt synthesis and optimization techniques for
Row 4: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: while our research employed a prompt synthesis and optimization | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: optimal prompt generation. We also devised a new semantic evaluRow 5: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: method yielding 320 prompts (§4.1), there remains potential for | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: ation metric to measure code summaries. Our rigorous evaluations
Row 6: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: discovering even more effective prompts and refining prompt engi- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: have resulted in 10 empirical results and 6 findings, which provide
Row 7: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: neering methodologies, like gradient-based prompt tuning [46]. | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: nuanced insights into both LLMs and binary code, serving as a
Row 8: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: Code Summary and Semantic Representations. In our research, | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: reference for future research in binary code comprehension.
Row 9: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: developer-written code comments served as our gold standard for | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary:
Row 10: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: code summaries. Alternative representations for these summaries | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: REFERENCES
Row 11: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: exist as well, such as analysis logs or system calls [36, 53]. How- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [1] angr decompiler. https://docs.angr.io/en/latest/analyses/decompiler.html. AcRow 12: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: cessed on 10-09-2023.
Row 13: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: ever, these representations are artificial, generated by third parties | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [2] Capstone - the ultimate disassembler. https://www.capstone-engine.org/. AcRow 14: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: instead of the code creators, and might not always align seman- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: cessed on 10-09-2023.
Row 15: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: tically with the original code. We observe that developers’ com- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [3] Chatgpt: Everything you need to know about openai’s gpt-4 tool. https://www.
Row 16: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: sciencefocus.com/future-technology/gpt-3. Accessed on 10-01-2023.
Row 17: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: ments present a more intuitive option. This aligns with conven- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [4] Chroma - the ai-native open-source embedding database. https://www.trychroma.
Row 18: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: tional methodologies utilized in prior studies [23, 33, 38]. Similar | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: com/. Accessed on 09-26-2023.
Row 19: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [5] Code llama. https://huggingface.co/codellama. Accessed on 10-01-2023.
Row 20: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: to well-known code summary datasets, e.g., CodeSearchNet [38], | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary:
Row 21: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [6] Common crawl dataset. https://registry.opendata.aws/commoncrawl/. Accessed
Row 22: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: our dataset may also include semantic inconsistent noise [29] in- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: on 10-07-2023.
Row 23: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: troduced by developers. While mitigating this noise is still an open | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [7] Darpa cyber grand challenge. https://www.darpa.mil/program/cyber-grandRow 24: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: challenge. Accessed on 10-06-2023.
Row 25: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: question, this would be a worthwhile focus for subsequent research. | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [8] Gnu software - free software foundation. https://www.gnu.org/software/. AcRow 26: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: cessed on 10-03-2023.
Row 27: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: 7 RELATEDWORK | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [9] Introducing ai-powered insights in threat intelligence. https://cloud.google.com/
Row 28: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: blog/products/identity-security/rsa-introducing-ai-powered-insights-threatRow 29: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: LLM for Binary Reverse Engineering. Binary reverse engineer- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: intelligence. Accessed on 10-12-2023.
Row 30: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: ing is labor-intensive and suffers from the absence of high-level | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [10] Introducing microsoft security copilot. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
Row 31: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: security/business/ai-machine-learning/microsoft-security-copilot. Accessed
Row 32: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: semantics, especially for stripped binaries. Existing LLM-based so- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: on 10-12-2023.
Row 33: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: lutions follow the pretraining-finetuning paradigm to learn binary | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [11] Introducing virustotal code insight: Empowering threat analysis with generative
Row 34: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: ai. https://blog.virustotal.com/2023/04/introducing-virustotal-code-insight.html.
Row 35: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: semantics from large binary corpora and transfer the learned knowl- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary:
Row 36: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: Accessed on 10-08-2023.
Row 37: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: edge to downstream tasks, e.g., function similarity detection [43, | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [12] Meta llama 2. https://huggingface.co/meta-llama. Accessed on 10-01-2023.
Row 38: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: 62, 74], variable name and type inference [25, 28, 59], and func- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [13] Module ida_hexrays. https://www.hex-rays.com/products/ida/support/
Row 39: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: idapython_docs/ida_hexrays.html. Accessed on 10-09-2023.
Row 40: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: tion name prediction [31, 40, 57]. For example, Trex [62] pretrains | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [14] Module ida_idaapi. https://www.hex-rays.com/products/ida/support/idapython_
Row 41: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: roBERTa on the assembly code and execution trace to detect func- | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: docs/ida_idaapi.html. Accessed on 10-09-2023.
Row 42: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: tion similarity. SymLM [40] predicts function names by learning | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [15] Open llm leaderboard. https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_
Row 43: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: leaderboard. Accessed on Date of 09-25-2023.
Row 44: formance across numerous tasks [51, 66], as well as the binary: calling context and execution behavior. Unlike existing works that | tensive binary code summarization dataset, with over 557K binary: [16] Openai api reference - create chat completion. https://platform.openai.com/docs/
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 13]
[27] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[28] Qibin Chen, Jeremy Lacomis, Edward J Schwartz, Claire Le Goues, Graham
Neubig, and Bogdan Vasilescu. Augmenting decompiler output with learned
variable names and types. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
22), pages 4327–4343, 2022.
[29] Qiuyuan Chen, Xin Xia, Han Hu, David Lo, and Shanping Li. Why my code
summarization model does not work: Code comment improvement with category
prediction. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) ,
30(2):1–29, 2021.
[30] Michael L Collard, Michael John Decker, and Jonathan I Maletic. srcml: An
infrastructure for the exploration, analysis, and manipulation of source code: A
tool demonstration. In 2013 IEEE International conference on software maintenance,
pages 516–519. IEEE, 2013.
[31] Yaniv David, Uri Alon, and Eran Yahav. Neural reverse engineering of stripped
binaries using augmented control flow graphs. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 4(OOPSLA):1–28, 2020.
[32] Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Song Han, Luping Shi, and Yuan Xie. Model compression and
hardware acceleration for neural networks: A comprehensive survey.Proceedings
of the IEEE, 108(4):485–532, 2020.
[33] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong,
Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, et al. Codebert: A pre-trained
model for programming and natural languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08155,
2020.
[34] Jian Gao, Xin Yang, Ying Fu, Yu Jiang, and Jiaguang Sun. Vulseeker: A semantic
learning based vulnerability seeker for cross-platform binary. In Proceedings of
the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering ,
pages 896–899, 2018.
[35] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long
Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, et al. Graphcodebert: Pretraining code representations with data flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08366 ,
2020.
[36] Yu Hao, Guoren Li, Xiaochen Zou, Weiteng Chen, Shitong Zhu, Zhiyun Qian,
and Ardalan Amiri Sani. Syzdescribe: Principled, automated, static generation of
syscall descriptions for kernel drivers. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP), pages 3262–3278. IEEE Computer Society, 2023.
[37] Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun
Yu, and Jiawei Han. Large language models can self-improve. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.11610, 2022.
[38] Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc
Brockschmidt. Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code
search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436, 2019.
[39] Srinivasan Iyer, Ioannis Konstas, Alvin Cheung, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Summarizing source code using a neural attention model. In 54th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics 2016 , pages 2073–2083. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2016.
[40] Xin Jin, Kexin Pei, Jun Yeon Won, and Zhiqiang Lin. Symlm: Predicting function
names in stripped binaries via context-sensitive execution-aware code embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, pages 1631–1645, 2022.
[41] Denis Kocetkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Jia Li, Chenghao Mou, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Yacine Jernite, Margaret Mitchell, Sean Hughes, Thomas
Wolf, et al. The stack: 3 tb of permissively licensed source code. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.15533, 2022.
[42] Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1808.06226, 2018.
[43] Xuezixiang Li, Yu Qu, and Heng Yin. Palmtree: Learning an assembly language
model for instruction embedding. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pages 3236–3251, 2021.
[44] Zekun Li, Baolin Peng, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Xifeng
Yan. Guiding large language models via directional stimulus prompting. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.11520, 2023.
[45] Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text
summarization branches out, pages 74–81, 2004.
[46] Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and
Graham Neubig. Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting
methods in natural language processing. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35,
2023.
[47] Zhenhao Luo, Pengfei Wang, Baosheng Wang, Yong Tang, Wei Xie, Xu Zhou,
Danjun Liu, and Kai Lu. Vulhawk: Cross-architecture vulnerability detection
with entropy-based binary code search. In NDSS, 2023.
[48] Alessandro Mantovani, Simone Aonzo, Yanick Fratantonio, and Davide Balzarotti.
{RE-Mind}: a first look inside the mind of a reverse engineer. In 31st USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22) , pages 2727–2745, 2022.
[49] Bonan Min, Hayley Ross, Elior Sulem, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Thien Huu
Nguyen, Oscar Sainz, Eneko Agirre, Ilana Heintz, and Dan Roth. Recent advances
in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.
ACM Computing Surveys, 2021.
[50] Shervin Minaee, Nal Kalchbrenner, Erik Cambria, Narjes Nikzad, Meysam
Chenaghlu, and Jianfeng Gao. Deep learning–based text classification: a comprehensive review. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 54(3):1–40, 2021.
[51] R OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv, pages 2303–08774, 2023.
[52] Ori Or-Meir, Nir Nissim, Yuval Elovici, and Lior Rokach. Dynamic malware
analysis in the modern era—a state of the art survey. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 52(5):1–48, 2019.
[53] Yu Pan, Zhichao Xu, Levi Taiji Li, Yunhe Yang, and Mu Zhang. Automated generation of security-centric descriptions for smart contract bytecode. InProceedings of
the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
pages 1244–1256, 2023.
[54] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation. InProceedings of the 40th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 311–318, 2002.
[55] Terence Parr. The definitive antlr 4 reference. The Definitive ANTLR 4 Reference ,
pages 1–326, 2013.
[56] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al.
Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances
in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019.
[57] James Patrick-Evans, Moritz Dannehl, and Johannes Kinder. Xfl: Naming functions in binaries with extreme multi-label learning. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 2375–2390. IEEE, 2023.
[58] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel,
Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss,
Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. the Journal of
machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[59] Kexin Pei, Jonas Guan, Matthew Broughton, Zhongtian Chen, Songchen Yao,
David Williams-King, Vikas Ummadisetty, Junfeng Yang, Baishakhi Ray, and
Suman Jana. Stateformer: Fine-grained type recovery from binaries using generative state modeling. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, pages 690–702, 2021.
[60] Kexin Pei, Jonas Guan, David Williams-King, Junfeng Yang, and Suman Jana.
Xda: Accurate, robust disassembly with transfer learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.00770, 2020.
[61] Kexin Pei, Dongdong She, Michael Wang, Scott Geng, Zhou Xuan, Yaniv David,
Junfeng Yang, Suman Jana, and Baishakhi Ray. Neudep: neural binary memory
dependence analysis. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering,
pages 747–759, 2022.
[62] Kexin Pei, Zhou Xuan, Junfeng Yang, Suman Jana, and Baishakhi Ray. Trex:
Learning execution semantics from micro-traces for binary similarity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.08680, 2020.
[63] Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng.
Automatic prompt optimization with" gradient descent" and beam search. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.03495, 2023.
[64] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed:
System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion
parameters. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pages 3505–3506, 2020.
[65] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using
siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
[66] Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama:
Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
[67] Ensheng Shi, Yanlin Wang, Lun Du, Junjie Chen, Shi Han, Hongyu Zhang, Dongmei Zhang, and Hongbin Sun. On the evaluation of neural code summarization.
In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering , pages
1597–1608, 2022.
[68] Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, Christopher Salls, Nick Stephens, Mario Polino,
Andrew Dutcher, John Grosen, Siji Feng, Christophe Hauser, Christopher Kruegel,
et al. Sok:(state of) the art of war: Offensive techniques in binary analysis. In
2016 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP) , pages 138–157. IEEE, 2016.
[69] Jacob Stern. Gpt-4 might just be a bloated, pointless mess - the atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2023/03/openai-gpt4-parameters-power-debate/673290/. (Accessed on 10/12/2023).
[70] Haoye Tian, Weiqi Lu, Tsz On Li, Xunzhu Tang, Shing-Chi Cheung, Jacques Klein,
and Tegawendé F Bissyandé. Is chatgpt the ultimate programming assistant–how
far is it? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11938, 2023.
[71] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor- | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.
Row 1: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: mation processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: ACM Computing Surveys, 2021.
Row 2: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [28] Qibin Chen, Jeremy Lacomis, Edward J Schwartz, Claire Le Goues, Graham | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [50] Shervin Minaee, Nal Kalchbrenner, Erik Cambria, Narjes Nikzad, Meysam
Row 3: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Neubig, and Bogdan Vasilescu. Augmenting decompiler output with learned | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Chenaghlu, and Jianfeng Gao. Deep learning–based text classification: a compreRow 4: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: variable names and types. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: hensive review. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 54(3):1–40, 2021.
Row 5: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: 22), pages 4327–4343, 2022. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [51] R OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv, pages 2303–08774, 2023.
Row 6: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [29] Qiuyuan Chen, Xin Xia, Han Hu, David Lo, and Shanping Li. Why my code | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [52] Ori Or-Meir, Nir Nissim, Yuval Elovici, and Lior Rokach. Dynamic malware
Row 7: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: summarization model does not work: Code comment improvement with category | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: analysis in the modern era—a state of the art survey. ACM Computing Surveys
Row 8: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: prediction. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: (CSUR), 52(5):1–48, 2019.
Row 9: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: 30(2):1–29, 2021. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [53] Yu Pan, Zhichao Xu, Levi Taiji Li, Yunhe Yang, and Mu Zhang. Automated generaRow 10: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [30] Michael L Collard, Michael John Decker, and Jonathan I Maletic. srcml: An | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: tion of security-centric descriptions for smart contract bytecode. In Proceedings of
Row 11: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: infrastructure for the exploration, analysis, and manipulation of source code: A | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
Row 12: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: tool demonstration. In 2013 IEEE International conference on software maintenance, | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: pages 1244–1256, 2023.
Row 13: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: pages 516–519. IEEE, 2013. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [54] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method
Row 14: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [31] Yaniv David, Uri Alon, and Eran Yahav. Neural reverse engineering of stripped | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual
Row 15: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: binaries using augmented control flow graphs. Proceedings of the ACM on Pro- | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318, 2002.
Row 16: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: gramming Languages, 4(OOPSLA):1–28, 2020. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [55] Terence Parr. The definitive antlr 4 reference. The Definitive ANTLR 4 Reference,
Row 17: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [32] Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Song Han, Luping Shi, and Yuan Xie. Model compression and | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: pages 1–326, 2013.
Row 18: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: hardware acceleration for neural networks: A comprehensive survey. Proceedings | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [56] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
Row 19: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: of the IEEE, 108(4):485–532, 2020. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al.
Row 20: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [33] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances
Row 21: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, et al. Codebert: A pre-trained | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Row 22: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: model for programming and natural languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08155, | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [57] James Patrick-Evans, Moritz Dannehl, and Johannes Kinder. Xfl: Naming funcRow 23: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: 2020. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: tions in binaries with extreme multi-label learning. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on
Row 24: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [34] Jian Gao, Xin Yang, Ying Fu, Yu Jiang, and Jiaguang Sun. Vulseeker: A semantic | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Security and Privacy (SP), pages 2375–2390. IEEE, 2023.
Row 25: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: learning based vulnerability seeker for cross-platform binary. In Proceedings of | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [58] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel,
Row 26: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss,
Row 27: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: pages 896–899, 2018. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. the Journal of
Row 28: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [35] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Row 29: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, et al. Graphcodebert: Pre- | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [59] Kexin Pei, Jonas Guan, Matthew Broughton, Zhongtian Chen, Songchen Yao,
Row 30: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: training code representations with data flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08366, | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: David Williams-King, Vikas Ummadisetty, Junfeng Yang, Baishakhi Ray, and
Row 31: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: 2020. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Suman Jana. Stateformer: Fine-grained type recovery from binaries using generRow 32: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [36] Yu Hao, Guoren Li, Xiaochen Zou, Weiteng Chen, Shitong Zhu, Zhiyun Qian, | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: ative state modeling. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European
Row 33: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: and Ardalan Amiri Sani. Syzdescribe: Principled, automated, static generation of | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Row 34: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: syscall descriptions for kernel drivers. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Engineering, pages 690–702, 2021.
Row 35: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Privacy (SP), pages 3262–3278. IEEE Computer Society, 2023. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [60] Kexin Pei, Jonas Guan, David Williams-King, Junfeng Yang, and Suman Jana.
Row 36: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [37] Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Xda: Accurate, robust disassembly with transfer learning. arXiv preprint
Row 37: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Yu, and Jiawei Han. Large language models can self-improve. arXiv preprint | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: arXiv:2010.00770, 2020.
Row 38: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: arXiv:2210.11610, 2022. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [61] Kexin Pei, Dongdong She, Michael Wang, Scott Geng, Zhou Xuan, Yaniv David,
Row 39: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [38] Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Junfeng Yang, Suman Jana, and Baishakhi Ray. Neudep: neural binary memory
Row 40: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Brockschmidt. Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: dependence analysis. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software
Row 41: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436, 2019. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering,
Row 42: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [39] Srinivasan Iyer, Ioannis Konstas, Alvin Cheung, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Summa- | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: pages 747–759, 2022.
Row 43: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: rizing source code using a neural attention model. In 54th Annual Meeting of the | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [62] Kexin Pei, Zhou Xuan, Junfeng Yang, Suman Jana, and Baishakhi Ray. Trex:
Row 44: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Association for Computational Linguistics 2016, pages 2073–2083. Association for | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Learning execution semantics from micro-traces for binary similarity. arXiv
Row 45: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Computational Linguistics, 2016. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: preprint arXiv:2012.08680, 2020.
Row 46: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [40] Xin Jin, Kexin Pei, Jun Yeon Won, and Zhiqiang Lin. Symlm: Predicting function | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [63] Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng.
Row 47: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: names in stripped binaries via context-sensitive execution-aware code embed- | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Automatic prompt optimization with" gradient descent" and beam search. arXiv
Row 48: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: dings. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: preprint arXiv:2305.03495, 2023.
Row 49: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Communications Security, pages 1631–1645, 2022. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [64] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed:
Row 50: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [41] Denis Kocetkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Jia Li, Chenghao Mou, Car- | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion
Row 51: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: los Muñoz Ferrandis, Yacine Jernite, Margaret Mitchell, Sean Hughes, Thomas | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: parameters. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Row 52: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Wolf, et al. The stack: 3 tb of permissively licensed source code. arXiv preprint | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pages 3505–3506, 2020.
Row 53: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: arXiv:2211.15533, 2022. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [65] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using
Row 54: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [42] Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A simple and language inde- | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Row 55: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: pendent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. arXiv | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [66] Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, XiaoRow 56: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: preprint arXiv:1808.06226, 2018. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: qing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama:
Row 57: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [43] Xuezixiang Li, Yu Qu, and Heng Yin. Palmtree: Learning an assembly language | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Row 58: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: model for instruction embedding. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Con- | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [67] Ensheng Shi, Yanlin Wang, Lun Du, Junjie Chen, Shi Han, Hongyu Zhang, DongRow 59: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: ference on Computer and Communications Security, pages 3236–3251, 2021. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: mei Zhang, and Hongbin Sun. On the evaluation of neural code summarization.
Row 60: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [44] Zekun Li, Baolin Peng, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Xifeng | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering, pages
Row 61: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Yan. Guiding large language models via directional stimulus prompting. arXiv | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: 1597–1608, 2022.
Row 62: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: preprint arXiv:2302.11520, 2023. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [68] Yan Shoshitaishvili, RuoyuWang, Christopher Salls, Nick Stephens, Mario Polino,
Row 63: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [45] Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: AndrewDutcher, John Grosen, Siji Feng, Christophe Hauser, Christopher Kruegel,
Row 64: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: summarization branches out, pages 74–81, 2004. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: et al. Sok:(state of) the art of war: Offensive techniques in binary analysis. In
Row 65: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [46] Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: 2016 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), pages 138–157. IEEE, 2016.
Row 66: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: GrahamNeubig. Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [69] Jacob Stern. Gpt-4 might just be a bloated, pointless mess - the atRow 67: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: methods in natural language processing. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35, | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: lantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2023/03/openai-gptRow 68: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: 2023. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: 4-parameters-power-debate/673290/. (Accessed on 10/12/2023).
Row 69: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [47] Zhenhao Luo, Pengfei Wang, Baosheng Wang, Yong Tang, Wei Xie, Xu Zhou, | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [70] Haoye Tian, Weiqi Lu, Tsz On Li, Xunzhu Tang, Shing-Chi Cheung, Jacques Klein,
Row 70: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: Danjun Liu, and Kai Lu. Vulhawk: Cross-architecture vulnerability detection | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: and Tegawendé F Bissyandé. Is chatgpt the ultimate programming assistant–how
Row 71: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: with entropy-based binary code search. In NDSS, 2023. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: far is it? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11938, 2023.
Row 72: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: [48] Alessandro Mantovani, Simone Aonzo, Yanick Fratantonio, and Davide Balzarotti. | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: [71] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, YasRow 73: Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural infor-: {RE-Mind}: a first look inside the mind of a reverse engineer. In 31st USENIX | in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey.: mine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhos-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 14]
[72] Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler
Reddy, David Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser,
Jonathan Bright, et al. Scipy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing
in python. Nature methods, 17(3):261–272, 2020.
[73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L
Mazurek. An observational investigation of reverse {Engineers’} processes. In
29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20) , pages 1875–1892, 2020.
[74] Hao Wang, Wenjie Qu, Gilad Katz, Wenyu Zhu, Zeyu Gao, Han Qiu, Jianwei
Zhuge, and Chao Zhang. Jtrans: Jump-aware transformer for binary code similarity detection. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis, pages 1–13, 2022.
[75] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven CH Hoi. Codet5: Identifieraware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and
generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00859, 2021.
[76] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian
Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al.
Emergent abilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682 ,
2022.
[77] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi,
Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning
in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
35:24824–24837, 2022.
[78] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue,
Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al.
Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
[79] Khaled Yakdan, Sergej Dechand, Elmar Gerhards-Padilla, and Matthew Smith.
Helping johnny to analyze malware: A usability-optimized decompiler and malware analysis user study. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) ,
pages 158–177. IEEE, 2016.
[80] Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. Large language models as optimizers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.03409, 2023.
[81] Xianjun Yang, Yan Li, Xinlu Zhang, Haifeng Chen, and Wei Cheng. Exploring the
limits of chatgpt for query or aspect-based text summarization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.08081, 2023.
[82] Zeping Yu, Rui Cao, Qiyi Tang, Sen Nie, Junzhou Huang, and Shi Wu. Order
matters: Semantic-aware neural networks for binary code similarity detection.
In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pages
1145–1152, 2020.
[83] Zeping Yu, Wenxin Zheng, Jiaqi Wang, Qiyi Tang, Sen Nie, and Shi Wu. Codecmr:
Cross-modal retrieval for function-level binary source code matching. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:3872–3883, 2020.
[84] Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis,
Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt
engineers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910, 2022.
A APPENDIX
A.1 Source Projects
Table 3 presents the 44 open-source projects that we used to compile
binaries.
A.2 Cross-compilation and Stripping
Our compilation and stripping processes are performed on a 64bit Ubuntu machine. Compiling and stripping binaries with computer architectures different from the host machine, i.e., ARM and
MIPS, requires cross-compilers and cross-stripping tools. For this,
we have used cross-compilers, arm-linux-gnueabihf-gcc and
mipsel-linux-gnu-gcc for ARM and MIPS binaries. For binary
stripping, we use the strip command for x86 and x64 binaries. For
ARM and MIPS binaries, we leveragearm-linux-gnueabihf-strip
and mipsel-linux-gnu-strip.
A.3 Binary Functions with Ground-truth
Summaries
Table 4 presents the distribution of binary functions across computer architectures and optimization levels with ground-truth summaries, extracted by methods defined in §2.1.
Table 3: The Source Projects in Our Dataset. The source
projects include 11,475,734 lines of code in total.
Project # Code Lines Project # Code Lines
binutils 2,151,781 gettext 1,429,180
libredwg 1,073,236 poke 991,146
openssl 626,521 libunistring 421,487
freeipmi 403,180 coreutils 290,065
mailutils 274,095 curl 243,426
guile 234,008 gmp 188,873
bash 177,371 wget2 171,082
findutils 168,910 inetutils 166,268
dico 153,630 libiconv 148,460
bison 140,331 ncurses 138,915
texinfo 138,167 grep 136,870
libmicrohttpd 133,438 mpfr 131,912
diffutils 129,150 tar 127,317
lightning 112,152 sed 107,964
nettle 102,932 nano 94,095
gawk 92,484 libpng 87,790
libidn2 83,079 datamash 79,427
gzip 56,628 cflow 49,403
gss 42,415 readline 41,759
direvent 41,756 gama 34,949
less 31,334 adns 11,820
units 9,994 libtool 6,934
Table 4: Binary Functions with Ground-truth Code Summaries across Computer Architectures and Optimization Levels. This dataset includes 557,664 binary functions in total.
Architecture Optimization # Binary Functions
x64
O0 37,304
O1 40,476
O2 43,543
O3 38,263
x86
O0 39,897
O1 31,779
O2 31,090
O3 34,508
ARM
O0 21,649
O1 34,287
O2 32,641
O3 27,453
MIPS
O0 44,745
O1 35,283
O2 34,589
O3 30,158
A.4 Evaluation Metrics for N-gram Matching
In this paper, we report three widely used n-gram matching-based
evaluation metrics, i.e., BLEU, METEOR, and ROUGE-L.
BLEU. Bilingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU) [54] is a commonly
employed metric for assessing the quality of generated texts versus

[TABLE page=14 index=1]
Columns: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project | # Code Lines | Project | # Code Lines.1
Row 1: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Mazurek. An observational investigation of reverse {Engineers’} processes. In | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 2: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20), pages 1875–1892, 2020. binutils | # Code Lines: 2,151,781 | Project: gettext | # Code Lines.1: 1,429,180
Row 3: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: [74] Hao Wang, Wenjie Qu, Gilad Katz, Wenyu Zhu, Zeyu Gao, Han Qiu, Jianwei libredwg | # Code Lines: 1,073,236 | Project: poke | # Code Lines.1: 991,146
Row 4: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Zhuge, and Chao Zhang. Jtrans: Jump-aware transformer for binary code similar- | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 5: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: 421,487ity detection. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT International Symposiumopenssl | # Code Lines: 626,521 | Project: libunistring | # Code Lines.1:
Row 6: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: on Software Testing and Analysis, pages 1–13, 2022. freeipmi | # Code Lines: 403,180 | Project: coreutils | # Code Lines.1: 290,065
Row 7: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: [75] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven CH Hoi. Codet5: Identifier- mailutils | # Code Lines: 274,095 | Project: curl | # Code Lines.1: 243,426
Row 8: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: aware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 9: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: guile | # Code Lines: 234,008 | Project: gmp | # Code Lines.1: 188,873
Row 10: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00859, 2021. | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 11: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: [76] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian bash | # Code Lines: 177,371 | Project: wget2 | # Code Lines.1: 171,082
Row 12: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. findutils | # Code Lines: 168,910 | Project: inetutils | # Code Lines.1: 166,268
Row 13: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Emergent abilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, dico | # Code Lines: 153,630 | Project: libiconv | # Code Lines.1: 148,460
Row 14: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: 2022. | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 15: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: 138,915[77] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi,bison | # Code Lines: 140,331 | Project: ncurses | # Code Lines.1:
Row 16: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning texinfo | # Code Lines: 138,167 | Project: grep | # Code Lines.1: 136,870
Row 17: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, libmicrohttpd | # Code Lines: 133,438 | Project: mpfr | # Code Lines.1: 131,912
Row 18: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: 35:24824–24837, 2022. diffutils | # Code Lines: 129,150 | Project: tar | # Code Lines.1: 127,317
Row 19: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: [78] ThomasWolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 20: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. lightning | # Code Lines: 112,152 | Project: sed | # Code Lines.1: 107,964
Row 21: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv nettle | # Code Lines: 102,932 | Project: nano | # Code Lines.1: 94,095
Row 22: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019. gawk | # Code Lines: 92,484 | Project: libpng | # Code Lines.1: 87,790
Row 23: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: [79] Khaled Yakdan, Sergej Dechand, Elmar Gerhards-Padilla, and Matthew Smith. | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 24: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: libidn2 | # Code Lines: 83,079 | Project: datamash | # Code Lines.1: 79,427
Row 25: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Helping johnny to analyze malware: A usability-optimized decompiler and mal- | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 26: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: ware analysis user study. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), gzip | # Code Lines: 56,628 | Project: cflow | # Code Lines.1: 49,403
Row 27: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: pages 158–177. IEEE, 2016. gss | # Code Lines: 42,415 | Project: readline | # Code Lines.1: 41,759
Row 28: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: [80] Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny direvent | # Code Lines: 41,756 | Project: gama | # Code Lines.1: 34,949
Row 29: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. Large language models as optimizers. arXiv preprint | # Code Lines: | Project: | # Code Lines.1:
Row 30: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: arXiv:2309.03409, 2023. less | # Code Lines: 31,334 | Project: adns | # Code Lines.1: 11,820
Row 31: [73] Daniel Votipka, Seth Rabin, Kristopher Micinski, Jeffrey S Foster, and Michelle L Project: [81] Xianjun Yang, Yan Li, Xinlu Zhang, Haifeng Chen, and Wei Cheng. Exploring the units | # Code Lines: 9,994 | Project: libtool | # Code Lines.1: 6,934
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=14 index=2]
Columns: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020. | Architecture | Optimization | # Binary Functions
Row 1: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: [84] Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, | Architecture: | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 2: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt | Architecture: | Optimization: O0 | # Binary Functions: 37,304
Row 3: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: engineers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910, 2022. | Architecture: | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 4: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O1 | # Binary Functions: 40,476
Row 5: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: x64 | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 6: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O2 | # Binary Functions: 43,543
Row 7: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: A APPENDIX | Architecture: | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 8: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O3 | # Binary Functions: 38,263
Row 9: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: A.1 Source Projects | Architecture: | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 10: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O0 | # Binary Functions: 39,897
Row 11: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: Table 3 presents the 44 open-source projects that we used to compile | Architecture: | Optimization: O1 | # Binary Functions: 31,779
Row 12: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: binaries. | Architecture: x86 | Optimization: O2 | # Binary Functions: 31,090
Row 13: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O3 | # Binary Functions: 34,508
Row 14: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: A.2 Cross-compilation and Stripping | Architecture: | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 15: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O0 | # Binary Functions: 21,649
Row 16: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: Our compilation and stripping processes are performed on a 64- | Architecture: | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 17: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O1 | # Binary Functions: 34,287
Row 18: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: bit Ubuntu machine. Compiling and stripping binaries with com- | Architecture: ARM | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 19: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O2 | # Binary Functions: 32,641
Row 20: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: puter architectures different from the host machine, i.e., ARM and | Architecture: | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 21: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: | Architecture: | Optimization: O3 | # Binary Functions: 27,453
Row 22: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: MIPS, requires cross-compilers and cross-stripping tools. For this, | Architecture: | Optimization: | # Binary Functions:
Row 23: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: we have used cross-compilers, arm-linux-gnueabihf-gcc and | Architecture: | Optimization: O0 | # Binary Functions: 44,745
Row 24: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: mipsel-linux-gnu-gcc for ARM and MIPS binaries. For binary | Architecture: MIPS | Optimization: O1 | # Binary Functions: 35,283
Row 25: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: stripping, we use the strip command for x86 and x64 binaries. For | Architecture: | Optimization: O2 | # Binary Functions: 34,589
Row 26: in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3872–3883, 2020.: ARMandMIPS binaries, we leverage arm-linux-gnueabihf-strip | Architecture: | Optimization: O3 | # Binary Functions: 30,158
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 15]
reference texts. It is a variant of precision metrics and quantifies
similarity by computing the n-gram precision between a generated
summary and a reference summary, with a penalty for excessively
short lengths. The BLEU score is computed as follows:
BLEU = BP × exp
𝑁∑︁
𝑛=1
𝑁 log p𝑛
!
(4)
where BP represents the brevity penalty, 𝑁 signifies the maximum
order of n-grams taken into account, and p𝑛 denotes the precision
associated with n-grams. In this paper, we report the BLEU-1 score
which is calculated on the unigram matching results. We have also
calculated BLEU-2, BLEU-3, and BLEU-4, but their scores are 0 for
most samples.
METEOR. Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering (METEOR) [26] is proposed to improve the measurement of
text ordering. In the context of comparing a pair of summaries, METEOR establishes a word alignment between them and subsequently
computes similarity scores. Formally, METEOR is calculated by:
METEOR = (1 − 𝛾 × 𝑓 𝛽 ) × 𝑃 × 𝑅
𝛼 × 𝑃 + ( 1 − 𝛼) × 𝑅 (5)
where 𝑃 and 𝑅 are the precision and recall of the mapped unigrams
in generated summaries and summary references. 𝑓 is the fragmentation coefficient. The penalty parameters 𝛼, 𝛽, and 𝛾 come with
default values of 0.9, 3.0, and 0.5, respectively.
ROUGE-L. ROUGE-L is a variant of Recall-oriented Understudy
for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE), calculated based on the longest
common subsequence (LCS) between the pair of texts. Specifically,
ROGUE-L is calculated by:
𝐹𝑙𝑐𝑠 = (1 + 𝛽2) × 𝑅𝑙𝑐𝑠 × 𝑃𝑙𝑐𝑠
𝑅𝑙𝑐𝑠 + 𝛽2 × 𝑃𝑙𝑐𝑠
(6)
where 𝑃𝑙𝑐𝑠 and 𝑅𝑙𝑐𝑠 are the precision and recall of the LCS between
generated summaries and summary references. 𝛽 governs the relative significance of precision and recall, which is commonly set to
1.2.
A.5 Prompt Evaluation Results
Table 5 presents the top 40 prompts and their evaluation results,
which are generated by our in-context prompt synthesis and optimization approach (proposed in §2.2). As mentioned in §3, we first
generate 320 prompts by GPT-4, and then evaluate each of them on
1000 binary function samples that are randomly selected from our
binary summarization dataset. To generate the 320 prompts, we
chose to use GPT-4 because these tasks essentially involve test generation, and GPT-4 has shown advanced performance in this area
according to OpenAI’s documentation [51]. Based on the semantic
similarity score, we select the best prompt in our subsequent evaluation. In addition to the prompt text, we also added instructions to
limit the summary length as discussed in §2.3. To ease the process
of retrieving summaries, we get structured summary output by
adding the following text to LLM inputs, such as “Input decompiled
code:\n<CODE>\n Function Summary:” for decompiled code summarization, in which <CODE> is filled with test decompiled code.
For the GPT-4, ChatGPT, Llama 2, and Code Llama models, we use
the same prompt for a fair comparison. For BinT5, it is fine-tuned on
decompiled code without natural language instructions, therefore,
we use the same input form, i.e., decompiled code, as its test input.
A.6 Case Study of LLM-generated Summaries
Following the acquisition of statistical results, we perform a more
in-depth study into the extent to which LLMs can comprehend
binary code, as well as the nuanced interpretation of specific score
outcomes. For this, we perform a series of case studies on LLMgenerated summaries. Our focus is on samples in which LLMs attain
scores at the highest (100th percentile), median (50th percentile)
and lowest (0th percentile) semantic similarity scores. This investigative approach aims to provide us with distributional insights
across extreme and median scenarios, thereby shedding light on
the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source
code, our overarching observation is that LLM can capture most of
its semantics (as presented in Table 6). For example, the summaries
of source function 3 that obtain the median score show that the
LLM has adeptly discerned the key semantics of “skip characters”
and “return the index”. In addition, we observe a similarly good
performance from summaries of decompiled code with debugging
symbols (such as samples in Table 7). However, for decompiled
code from stripped binaries, we find that LLMs cannot generate
summaries explicitly matching the semantics of ground-truth summaries (as shown in Table 8). For example, LLMs only manage to
capture partial or elementary semantics of functions 2 and 3, despite
their scores falling within the median range. For function 2, the
generated summary includes the semantics of “file name canonicalization” but it fails to include specific details of the ground truth,
such as “remov2 dots”. For function 3, LLM only captures the ELF
file format and loses all other semantic information.
Finding 1 ( F1) – Although LLMs excel at source code and decompiled code with symbols, the absence of debugging symbols
makes LLMs generate summaries with only partial or elementary semantics of decompiled code.
For lower-level code, e.g., IR code and assembly code, we observe that LLMs predominantly focus on describing the low-level
operations, without providing comprehensive high-level semantic
summaries. For instance, Table 9 presents the summaries and evaluation scores of the IR code. Across samples that obtained the highest
to lowest scores, LLM-generated summaries mostly describe the
operations of data movement, arithmetic calculations (e.g., addition
and subtraction), memory loading/writing, and data flow transformation (e.g., jump operation). Similarly, we also observe such
descriptions for assembly code as shown in Table 10. Divergent
slightly from the IR code summaries, we find that in the case of the
highest score for assembly code, LLM can capture essential information related to the string data structure and the copy operation.
Finding 2 ( F2) – LLM-generated summaries fail to encapsulate
the high-level semantics of IR and assembly code, instead, focusing on elucidating the low-level operations, e.g., data movement
and arithmetic calculations.
In the case of raw bytes, one would anticipate that LLMs generate summaries that describe a sequence of bytes. However, it is

[TABLE page=15 index=1]
Columns: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source
Row 1: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: dering (METEOR) [26] is proposed to improve the measurement of code, our overarching observation is that LLM can capture most of
Row 2: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: text ordering. In the context of comparing a pair of summaries, ME- its semantics (as presented in Table 6). For example, the summaries
Row 3: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: TEOR establishes aword alignment between them and subsequently of source function 3 that obtain the median score show that the
Row 4: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: computes similarity scores. Formally, METEOR is calculated by: LLM has adeptly discerned the key semantics of “skip characters”
Row 5: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: and “return the index”. In addition, we observe a similarly goodP × R
Row 6: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: METEOR β= (1 − γ × f ) × (5)
Row 7: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: α × P + (1 − α ) × Rperformance from summaries of decompiled code with debugging
Row 8: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: symbols (such as samples in Table 7). However, for decompiled
Row 9: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: where P and R are the precision and recall of the mapped unigrams
Row 10: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: code from stripped binaries, we find that LLMs cannot generate
Row 11: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: in generated summaries and summary references. f is the fragmenRow 12: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: summaries explicitly matching the semantics of ground-truth sumRow 13: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: tation coefficient. The penalty parameters α , β , and γ come with
Row 14: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: maries (as shown in Table 8). For example, LLMs only manage to
Row 15: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: default values of 0.9, 3.0, and 0.5, respectively.
Row 16: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: capture partial or elementary semantics of functions 2 and 3, despite
Row 17: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: ROUGE-L. ROUGE-L is a variant of Recall-oriented Understudy their scores falling within the median range. For function 2, the
Row 18: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE), calculated based on the longest generated summary includes the semantics of “file name canonicalRow 19: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: common subsequence (LCS) between the pair of texts. Specifically, ization” but it fails to include specific details of the ground truth,
Row 20: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: ROGUE-L is calculated by: such as “remov2 dots”. For function 3, LLM only captures the ELF
Row 21: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: (1 + β 2) × R × Pfile format and loses all other semantic information.
Row 22: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: lcs lcs
Row 23: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: F = (6)
Row 24: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: lcs
Row 25: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: R + β 2× P
Row 26: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: lcs lcs Finding 1 (F1) – Although LLMs excel at source code and deRow 27: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: where P and R are the precision and recall of the LCS between compiled code with symbols, the absence of debugging symbols
Row 28: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: lcs lcs
Row 29: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: generated summaries and summary references. β governs the rela- makes LLMs generate summaries with only partial or elemenRow 30: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: tive significance of precision and recall, which is commonly set to tary semantics of decompiled code.
Row 31: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: 1.2.
Row 32: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: For lower-level code, e.g., IR code and assembly code, we obRow 33: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: A.5 Prompt Evaluation Results serve that LLMs predominantly focus on describing the low-level
Row 34: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: operations, without providing comprehensive high-level semantic
Row 35: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: Table 5 presents the top 40 prompts and their evaluation results,
Row 36: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: summaries. For instance, Table 9 presents the summaries and evaluRow 37: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: which are generated by our in-context prompt synthesis and optiRow 38: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: ation scores of the IR code. Across samples that obtained the highest
Row 39: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: mization approach (proposed in §2.2). As mentioned in §3, we first
Row 40: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: to lowest scores, LLM-generated summaries mostly describe the
Row 41: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: generate 320 prompts by GPT-4, and then evaluate each of them on
Row 42: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: operations of data movement, arithmetic calculations (e.g., addition
Row 43: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: 1000 binary function samples that are randomly selected from our
Row 44: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: and subtraction), memory loading/writing, and data flow transRow 45: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: binary summarization dataset. To generate the 320 prompts, we
Row 46: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: formation (e.g., jump operation). Similarly, we also observe such
Row 47: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: chose to use GPT-4 because these tasks essentially involve test genRow 48: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: descriptions for assembly code as shown in Table 10. Divergent
Row 49: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: eration, and GPT-4 has shown advanced performance in this area
Row 50: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: slightly from the IR code summaries, we find that in the case of the
Row 51: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: according to OpenAI’s documentation [51]. Based on the semantic
Row 52: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: highest score for assembly code, LLM can capture essential inforRow 53: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: similarity score, we select the best prompt in our subsequent evaluRow 54: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: mation related to the string data structure and the copy operation.
Row 55: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: ation. In addition to the prompt text, we also added instructions to
Row 56: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: limit the summary length as discussed in §2.3. To ease the process Finding 2 (F2) – LLM-generated summaries fail to encapsulate
Row 57: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: of retrieving summaries, we get structured summary output by the high-level semantics of IR and assembly code, instead, focusRow 58: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: adding the following text to LLM inputs, such as “Input decompiled ing on elucidating the low-level operations, e.g., data movement
Row 59: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: code:\n<CODE>\n Function Summary:” for decompiled code sum- and arithmetic calculations.
Row 60: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: marization, in which <CODE> is filled with test decompiled code.
Row 61: METEOR.Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit OR- the robustness of LLM in binary code comprehension. For source: For the GPT-4, ChatGPT, Llama 2, and Code Llama models, we use In the case of raw bytes, one would anticipate that LLMs gen-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 16]
Table 5: Evaluation Results of Top Prompts Generated by Our Prompt Synthesis and Optimization Approach
ID Prompt Semantic
Similarity
BLEU METEOR ROUGE-L
1 Imagine you are a skilled binary reverse engineer. I will provide you with a binary function, and
your task is to analyze it thoroughly, explain its underlying functionality, and then deliver a
succinct and informative summary of its operation.
0.3723 0.0838 0.1138 0.1294
2 Please explain the purpose and functionality of the code. 0.3719 0.0802 0.1041 0.1425
3 Give me an in-depth overview of how it operates and summarize its functionality. 0.3709 0.0812 0.1074 0.1366
4 I’d like you to assume the role of a binary reverse engineer. I will supply a binary function, and
you will respond by explaining its functionality and providing a concise summary.
0.3701 0.0826 0.1069 0.1397
5 Please explain the purpose and usage of function. 0.3696 0.0845 0.1129 0.1396
6 Please provide a summary of its functionality. 0.3694 0.0754 0.1004 0.1413
7 Please explain the purpose and behavior of the function/code. 0.3682 0.0815 0.1085 0.1423
8 Please explain how the functions works and what its purpose is. 0.3667 0.0821 0.1111 0.1401
9 As an AI model with expertise in binary code analysis, your objective is to provide a concise and
informative summary of the given input code, focusing on the functionality and key aspects of the
function.
0.3665 0.0791 0.1063 0.1333
10 Please provide a detailed summary of its functionality. 0.3661 0.0797 0.1044 0.1402
11 Please explain the purpose and functionality of the input code. 0.3654 0.0761 0.0997 0.1397
12 Please describe the purpose or functionality of the given code. 0.365 0.0759 0.1 0.1431
13 Please reverse engineer the code and provide a high-level explanation of its functionality.0.364 0.0846 0.1082 0.1389
14 Give a concise overview of the function’s intended purpose. 0.3639 0.071 0.0922 0.1422
15 Please define the functionality of the input code. 0.363 0.0744 0.0985 0.143
16 Please provide a detailed explanation of its functionality. 0.3622 0.0804 0.1065 0.14
17 Please reverse engineer the input code and provide a detailed explanation of its functionality.0.3622 0.0824 0.1067 0.1366
18 Please provide a summary of the function’s purpose. 0.3615 0.0718 0.0938 0.1381
19 Reverse engineer the code and provide a high-level explanation of its functionality. 0.3612 0.084 0.1091 0.1386
20 Seeking help from skilled reverse engineers: I’ll supply a binary function, and you’re requested to
provide a brief summary of its purpose.
0.3608 0.0836 0.1035 0.1352
21 I want you to act as a binary reverse engineer. I will provide binary function and you will reply
with what this function does and give a brief summary.
0.3605 0.075 0.1002 0.1364
22 As an AI assistant specialized in binary code comprehension, you are provided with a binary
function code. Your task is to succinctly summarize it in a human-readable form.
0.3604 0.0731 0.0964 0.1367
23 You are an AI model trained to understand binary code. The task for you is to summarize the input
code of a function.
0.3589 0.0722 0.0951 0.1356
24 Please determine the purpose or functionality of the given code. 0.3584 0.0718 0.0934 0.142
25 In your role as an AI assistant proficient in binary code comprehension, you’re presented with a
binary function code. Could you please provide a human-readable summary of it?
0.3565 0.0755 0.1026 0.1329
26 You possess expertise in binary code comprehension, and your objective is to condense the input
code of a function into a summary.
0.3542 0.0634 0.082 0.1261
27 As a helpful AI assistant for binary code understanding, you are given a binary function code, Can
you summarize it in human language?
0.3528 0.0759 0.1014 0.1373
28 Calling out for assistance from knowledgeable reverse engineers. I will provide a binary function
and you will summarize it into a short sentence.
0.3528 0.0691 0.0894 0.1307
29 Could you offer a brief description of how it functions? 0.3523 0.0713 0.094 0.1347
30 Hello ChatGPT. You are about to immerse yourself into the role of code understanding machine.
Generate a short summary of the following binary function.
0.3521 0.0824 0.1117 0.131
31 I’d like you to act as a reverse engineer who can summarize a user-input binary function into a
concise sentence.
0.3519 0.0776 0.0971 0.1347
32 Please explain how the input function work. 0.3518 0.0829 0.1105 0.1359
33 Generate a succinct summary for the given binary function. 0.351 0.0788 0.1028 0.1344
34 Produce a concise summary for the provided binary function. 0.3509 0.0743 0.0963 0.1354
35 Please acknowledge my following request. I will ask for a short summary of the following binary
function.
0.3488 0.0754 0.0991 0.1291
36 Come up with a concise summary of the following binary function. 0.3476 0.0765 0.1004 0.1325
37 Act as a reverse engineer that takes user-input binary function and summarize it into a short
sentence.
0.3476 0.0663 0.085 0.1315
38 Reverse engineer the provided binary function and distill its essence into a concise one-sentence
summary.
0.346 0.0803 0.1036 0.1344
39 Assume that you are a reverse engineer that takes user-input binary function. Summarize it into a
short sentence.
0.3398 0.0692 0.0905 0.1298
40 Function as a reverse engineer who can encapsulate a user-input binary function in a concise
sentence.
0.3296 0.0693 0.0879 0.123

[TABLE page=16 index=1]
Columns: ID | Prompt | Semantic | BLEU | METEOR | ROUGE-L
Row 1: ID: | Prompt: | Semantic: Similarity | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 2: ID: 1.0 | Prompt: Imagine you are a skilled binary reverse engineer. I will provide you with a binary function, and | Semantic: 0.3723 | BLEU: 0.0838 | METEOR: 0.1138 | ROUGE-L: 0.1294
Row 3: ID: | Prompt: your task is to analyze it thoroughly, explain its underlying functionality, and then deliver a | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 4: ID: | Prompt: succinct and informative summary of its operation. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 5: ID: 2.0 | Prompt: Please explain the purpose and functionality of the code. | Semantic: 0.3719 | BLEU: 0.0802 | METEOR: 0.1041 | ROUGE-L: 0.1425
Row 6: ID: 3.0 | Prompt: Give me an in-depth overview of how it operates and summarize its functionality. | Semantic: 0.3709 | BLEU: 0.0812 | METEOR: 0.1074 | ROUGE-L: 0.1366
Row 7: ID: 4.0 | Prompt: I’d like you to assume the role of a binary reverse engineer. I will supply a binary function, and | Semantic: 0.3701 | BLEU: 0.0826 | METEOR: 0.1069 | ROUGE-L: 0.1397
Row 8: ID: | Prompt: you will respond by explaining its functionality and providing a concise summary. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 9: ID: 5.0 | Prompt: Please explain the purpose and usage of function. | Semantic: 0.3696 | BLEU: 0.0845 | METEOR: 0.1129 | ROUGE-L: 0.1396
Row 10: ID: 6.0 | Prompt: Please provide a summary of its functionality. | Semantic: 0.3694 | BLEU: 0.0754 | METEOR: 0.1004 | ROUGE-L: 0.1413
Row 11: ID: 7.0 | Prompt: Please explain the purpose and behavior of the function/code. | Semantic: 0.3682 | BLEU: 0.0815 | METEOR: 0.1085 | ROUGE-L: 0.1423
Row 12: ID: 8.0 | Prompt: Please explain how the functions works and what its purpose is. | Semantic: 0.3667 | BLEU: 0.0821 | METEOR: 0.1111 | ROUGE-L: 0.1401
Row 13: ID: 9.0 | Prompt: As an AI model with expertise in binary code analysis, your objective is to provide a concise and | Semantic: 0.3665 | BLEU: 0.0791 | METEOR: 0.1063 | ROUGE-L: 0.1333
Row 14: ID: | Prompt: informative summary of the given input code, focusing on the functionality and key aspects of the | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 15: ID: | Prompt: function. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 16: ID: 10.0 | Prompt: Please provide a detailed summary of its functionality. | Semantic: 0.3661 | BLEU: 0.0797 | METEOR: 0.1044 | ROUGE-L: 0.1402
Row 17: ID: 11.0 | Prompt: Please explain the purpose and functionality of the input code. | Semantic: 0.3654 | BLEU: 0.0761 | METEOR: 0.0997 | ROUGE-L: 0.1397
Row 18: ID: 12.0 | Prompt: Please describe the purpose or functionality of the given code. | Semantic: 0.365 | BLEU: 0.0759 | METEOR: 0.1 | ROUGE-L: 0.1431
Row 19: ID: 13.0 | Prompt: Please reverse engineer the code and provide a high-level explanation of its functionality. | Semantic: 0.364 | BLEU: 0.0846 | METEOR: 0.1082 | ROUGE-L: 0.1389
Row 20: ID: 14.0 | Prompt: Give a concise overview of the function’s intended purpose. | Semantic: 0.3639 | BLEU: 0.071 | METEOR: 0.0922 | ROUGE-L: 0.1422
Row 21: ID: 15.0 | Prompt: Please define the functionality of the input code. | Semantic: 0.363 | BLEU: 0.0744 | METEOR: 0.0985 | ROUGE-L: 0.143
Row 22: ID: 16.0 | Prompt: Please provide a detailed explanation of its functionality. | Semantic: 0.3622 | BLEU: 0.0804 | METEOR: 0.1065 | ROUGE-L: 0.14
Row 23: ID: 17.0 | Prompt: Please reverse engineer the input code and provide a detailed explanation of its functionality. | Semantic: 0.3622 | BLEU: 0.0824 | METEOR: 0.1067 | ROUGE-L: 0.1366
Row 24: ID: 18.0 | Prompt: Please provide a summary of the function’s purpose. | Semantic: 0.3615 | BLEU: 0.0718 | METEOR: 0.0938 | ROUGE-L: 0.1381
Row 25: ID: 19.0 | Prompt: Reverse engineer the code and provide a high-level explanation of its functionality. | Semantic: 0.3612 | BLEU: 0.084 | METEOR: 0.1091 | ROUGE-L: 0.1386
Row 26: ID: 20.0 | Prompt: Seeking help from skilled reverse engineers: I’ll supply a binary function, and you’re requested to | Semantic: 0.3608 | BLEU: 0.0836 | METEOR: 0.1035 | ROUGE-L: 0.1352
Row 27: ID: | Prompt: provide a brief summary of its purpose. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 28: ID: 21.0 | Prompt: I want you to act as a binary reverse engineer. I will provide binary function and you will reply | Semantic: 0.3605 | BLEU: 0.075 | METEOR: 0.1002 | ROUGE-L: 0.1364
Row 29: ID: | Prompt: with what this function does and give a brief summary. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 30: ID: 22.0 | Prompt: As an AI assistant specialized in binary code comprehension, you are provided with a binary | Semantic: 0.3604 | BLEU: 0.0731 | METEOR: 0.0964 | ROUGE-L: 0.1367
Row 31: ID: | Prompt: function code. Your task is to succinctly summarize it in a human-readable form. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 32: ID: 23.0 | Prompt: You are an AI model trained to understand binary code. The task for you is to summarize the input | Semantic: 0.3589 | BLEU: 0.0722 | METEOR: 0.0951 | ROUGE-L: 0.1356
Row 33: ID: | Prompt: code of a function. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 34: ID: 24.0 | Prompt: Please determine the purpose or functionality of the given code. | Semantic: 0.3584 | BLEU: 0.0718 | METEOR: 0.0934 | ROUGE-L: 0.142
Row 35: ID: 25.0 | Prompt: In your role as an AI assistant proficient in binary code comprehension, you’re presented with a | Semantic: 0.3565 | BLEU: 0.0755 | METEOR: 0.1026 | ROUGE-L: 0.1329
Row 36: ID: | Prompt: binary function code. Could you please provide a human-readable summary of it? | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 37: ID: 26.0 | Prompt: You possess expertise in binary code comprehension, and your objective is to condense the input | Semantic: 0.3542 | BLEU: 0.0634 | METEOR: 0.082 | ROUGE-L: 0.1261
Row 38: ID: | Prompt: code of a function into a summary. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 39: ID: 27.0 | Prompt: As a helpful AI assistant for binary code understanding, you are given a binary function code, Can | Semantic: 0.3528 | BLEU: 0.0759 | METEOR: 0.1014 | ROUGE-L: 0.1373
Row 40: ID: | Prompt: you summarize it in human language? | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 41: ID: 28.0 | Prompt: Calling out for assistance from knowledgeable reverse engineers. I will provide a binary function | Semantic: 0.3528 | BLEU: 0.0691 | METEOR: 0.0894 | ROUGE-L: 0.1307
Row 42: ID: | Prompt: and you will summarize it into a short sentence. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 43: ID: 29.0 | Prompt: Could you offer a brief description of how it functions? | Semantic: 0.3523 | BLEU: 0.0713 | METEOR: 0.094 | ROUGE-L: 0.1347
Row 44: ID: 30.0 | Prompt: Hello ChatGPT. You are about to immerse yourself into the role of code understanding machine. | Semantic: 0.3521 | BLEU: 0.0824 | METEOR: 0.1117 | ROUGE-L: 0.131
Row 45: ID: | Prompt: Generate a short summary of the following binary function. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 46: ID: 31.0 | Prompt: I’d like you to act as a reverse engineer who can summarize a user-input binary function into a | Semantic: 0.3519 | BLEU: 0.0776 | METEOR: 0.0971 | ROUGE-L: 0.1347
Row 47: ID: | Prompt: concise sentence. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 48: ID: 32.0 | Prompt: Please explain how the input function work. | Semantic: 0.3518 | BLEU: 0.0829 | METEOR: 0.1105 | ROUGE-L: 0.1359
Row 49: ID: 33.0 | Prompt: Generate a succinct summary for the given binary function. | Semantic: 0.351 | BLEU: 0.0788 | METEOR: 0.1028 | ROUGE-L: 0.1344
Row 50: ID: 34.0 | Prompt: Produce a concise summary for the provided binary function. | Semantic: 0.3509 | BLEU: 0.0743 | METEOR: 0.0963 | ROUGE-L: 0.1354
Row 51: ID: 35.0 | Prompt: Please acknowledge my following request. I will ask for a short summary of the following binary | Semantic: 0.3488 | BLEU: 0.0754 | METEOR: 0.0991 | ROUGE-L: 0.1291
Row 52: ID: | Prompt: function. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 53: ID: 36.0 | Prompt: Come up with a concise summary of the following binary function. | Semantic: 0.3476 | BLEU: 0.0765 | METEOR: 0.1004 | ROUGE-L: 0.1325
Row 54: ID: 37.0 | Prompt: Act as a reverse engineer that takes user-input binary function and summarize it into a short | Semantic: 0.3476 | BLEU: 0.0663 | METEOR: 0.085 | ROUGE-L: 0.1315
Row 55: ID: | Prompt: sentence. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 56: ID: 38.0 | Prompt: Reverse engineer the provided binary function and distill its essence into a concise one-sentence | Semantic: 0.346 | BLEU: 0.0803 | METEOR: 0.1036 | ROUGE-L: 0.1344
Row 57: ID: | Prompt: summary. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 58: ID: 39.0 | Prompt: Assume that you are a reverse engineer that takes user-input binary function. Summarize it into a | Semantic: 0.3398 | BLEU: 0.0692 | METEOR: 0.0905 | ROUGE-L: 0.1298
Row 59: ID: | Prompt: short sentence. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 60: ID: 40.0 | Prompt: Function as a reverse engineer who can encapsulate a user-input binary function in a concise | Semantic: 0.3296 | BLEU: 0.0693 | METEOR: 0.0879 | ROUGE-L: 0.123
Row 61: ID: | Prompt: sentence. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 17]
surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict operations akin to those observed in IR code and assembly code (as
shown in Table 11), particularly for OpenAI models, i.e., ChatGPT
and GPT-4. For example, the summary of function 2 describes the
stack frame operations, function calls, and arithmetic operations,
which are not explicitly manifested in the raw byte input. It appears
that LLMs generate summaries by implicitly lifting the raw bytes
into higher-level representations, such as assembly code that can
represent the above-mentioned operations.
Finding 3 ( F3) – The LLM-generated summaries for raw bytes
closely resemble those for assembly code, hinting at an implicit
process of code lifting, performed by the LLMs.
In addition to understanding the performance of LLMs in individual samples, we have also confirmed the benefits of using our
proposed semantic evaluation metric. Specificaly, as stated in §1.1,
metrics based solely on exact matching fail to provide a precise
evaluation outcome, as they cannot encapsulate the semantic nuances of summaries. For instance, for function 2 in Table 6, BLEU
and METEOR scores are calculated as 0. However, function 2’s
generated and ground truth summaries present close semantics,
such as “routine” and “function”, as well as “a filename” and “the
name of the file”. These words/phrases are syntactically different,
but semantically the same. Moreover, its calculated scores of BLEU,
METETOR, and ROUGE-L are lower than those of function 4, while
function 2’s summaries have shown closer semantics. In contrast,
our semantic evaluation metric computes semantic similarity at
the semantic level, thus it generates fair scores that assign a higher
score for closer semantics in function 2 compared to function 4.
Therefore, we argue that our semantic evaluation metric is more
suitable for evaluating binary code summaries.
Finding 4 ( F4) – Our semantic evaluation metric can capture
the essential semantics of binary code summaries, which is more
suitable for our task than the exact matching-based metrics.
A.7 Case Study of GPT-4 Results
In RQ2 evaluations, it is surprising to observe that GPT-4 is not
the best model, especially when ChatGPT outclasses GPT-4 on the
binaries with symbols. For this, we have conducted a case study to
manually investigate the GPT-4 results. Overall, we observe that
GPT-4 occasionally focuses more on noisy details rather than capturing the global semantics of binary functions. Table 12 presents
three types of such cases, showcasing GPT-4 generated summaries
and ground truth along with those generated by ChatGPT for comparison. For function 1, we find that GPT-4 explains the implementation details of the input binary code, instead of providing a
concise summary. Such an explanation can capture some semantics,
such as its generated phrase “without changing its current position”
has similar semantics as the ground truth “preserving the value”,
but this explanation includes extra details that do not appear in
the ground truth. Similarly, GPT-4 generates additional details for
functions 2 and 3 as highlighted in the red text. Compared to GPT-4,
ChatGPT focuses less on superfluous details and generates more
concise summaries that represent the key semantics.
1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,
2 undefined4 param_4,undefined4 param_5,undefined4 param_6,
3 undefined4 param_7,undefined4 param_8,
4 undefined4 param_9,undefined8 param_10,
5 undefined8 param_11,undefined8 param_12,
6 undefined8 param_13,undefined8 param_14)
8 {
9 undefined4 uVar1;
10 char in_AL;
11 long in_FS_OFFSET;
12 undefined4 local_d8;
13 . . . // skip for simplicity
14 DAT_002bd1a8 = uVar1;
15 return;
16 }
Figure 14: Ghidra Generated Decompiled Code for error_ln
Function in the Stripped Binary Compiled from the Gawk
Project
Finding 5 ( F5) – For binaries with symbols, ChatGPT produces
more concise summaries and focuses on essential semantics,
showing improvement in brevity and clarity over GPT-4.
A.8 BinT5 Outliers and Sample Leakage
For RQ2 evaluation, we have noticed the presence of certain outliers in BinT5’s performance, which attain text similarity scores
exceeding 0.8. These scores are notably higher than the median values. By comparing the function names of these outlier samples with
BinT5’s training sets, we find that some of our Ghidra-generated
decompiled code samples are in BinT5’s training set. We have removed these leaked samples from our reported results of BinT5.
A.9 Impact of Symbols and Exclusive Symbol
Stripping
In RQ4 evaluations, we study which symbol type (data types, variable names, and function names) contributes the most to binary
function semantics by exclusively stripping symbols of each type.
We first treat the decompiled code with all symbols as the original
code. Subsequently, to isolate the impact of each symbol type, we
eliminate the respective symbols from the original code by substituting them with non-informative symbols. These non-informative
symbols follows the same pattern as these in decompiler-generated
symbols for stripped binaries. Specifically, for function names, we
replace the original names with symbol Fun_addr in which addr is
the address of functions. For variable names, we replace the original
names with symbol Var_idx where idx is the index of variables in
the function. For data types, we replace the original types with the
symbol undefined.
A.10 Summary Manipulation by Modifying
Function Names
While we have identified the significant semantic contribution
of function names for binary code semantics in R9, we also note
an intriguing vulnerability in LLM-generated summaries. Specifically, we’ve observed that these summaries can be manipulated by
altering function names. To elaborate, Figure 14 showcases a decompiled function generated by Ghidra, with all symbols removed.

[TABLE page=17 index=1]
Columns: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op- | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,
Row 1: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: erations akin to those observed in IR code and assembly code (as | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 2 undefined4 param_4,undefined4 param_5,undefined4 param_6,
Row 2: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 3 undefined4 param_7,undefined4 param_8,
Row 3: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: shown in Table 11), particularly for OpenAI models, i.e., ChatGPT | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 4 undefined4 param_9,undefined8 param_10,
Row 4: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 5 undefined8 param_11,undefined8 param_12,
Row 5: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: and GPT-4. For example, the summary of function 2 describes the | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 6: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 6 undefined8 param_13,undefined8 param_14)
Row 7: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: stack frame operations, function calls, and arithmetic operations, | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 7
Row 8: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 8 {
Row 9: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: which are not explicitly manifested in the raw byte input. It appears | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 9 undefined4 uVar1;
Row 10: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: that LLMs generate summaries by implicitly lifting the raw bytes | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 10 char in_AL;
Row 11: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 11 long in_FS_OFFSET;
Row 12: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: into higher-level representations, such as assembly code that can | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 12 undefined4 local_d8;
Row 13: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: represent the above-mentioned operations. | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 13 . . . // skip for simplicity
Row 14: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 14 DAT_002bd1a8 = uVar1;
Row 15: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 15 return;
Row 16: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: Finding 3 (F3) – The LLM-generated summaries for raw bytes | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: 16 }
Row 17: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: closely resemble those for assembly code, hinting at an implicit | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 18: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: process of code lifting, performed by the LLMs. | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: Figure 14: Ghidra Generated Decompiled Code for error_ln
Row 19: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: Function in the Stripped Binary Compiled from the Gawk
Row 20: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: In addition to understanding the performance of LLMs in indi- | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 21: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: Project
Row 22: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: vidual samples, we have also confirmed the benefits of using our | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 23: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: proposed semantic evaluation metric. Specificaly, as stated in §1.1, | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 24: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: metrics based solely on exact matching fail to provide a precise | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 25: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: Finding 5 (F5) – For binaries with symbols, ChatGPT produces
Row 26: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: evaluation outcome, as they cannot encapsulate the semantic nu- | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 27: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: more concise summaries and focuses on essential semantics,
Row 28: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: ances of summaries. For instance, for function 2 in Table 6, BLEU | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 29: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: showing improvement in brevity and clarity over GPT-4.
Row 30: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: and METEOR scores are calculated as 0. However, function 2’s | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 31: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: generated and ground truth summaries present close semantics, | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 32: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: such as “routine” and “function”, as well as “a filename” and “the | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: A.8 BinT5 Outliers and Sample Leakage
Row 33: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: name of the file”. These words/phrases are syntactically different, | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 34: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: For RQ2 evaluation, we have noticed the presence of certain out
Row 35: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: but semantically the same. Moreover, its calculated scores of BLEU, | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 36: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: liers in BinT5’s performance, which attain text similarity scores
Row 37: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: METETOR, and ROUGE-L are lower than those of function 4, while | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 38: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: exceeding 0.8. These scores are notably higher than the median val
Row 39: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: function 2’s summaries have shown closer semantics. In contrast, | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 40: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: ues. By comparing the function names of these outlier samples with
Row 41: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: our semantic evaluation metric computes semantic similarity at | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 42: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: BinT5’s training sets, we find that some of our Ghidra-generated
Row 43: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: the semantic level, thus it generates fair scores that assign a higher | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 44: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: decompiled code samples are in BinT5’s training set. We have re
Row 45: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: score for closer semantics in function 2 compared to function 4. | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 46: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: moved these leaked samples from our reported results of BinT5.
Row 47: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: Therefore, we argue that our semantic evaluation metric is more | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 48: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: suitable for evaluating binary code summaries. | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 49: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: A.9 Impact of Symbols and Exclusive Symbol
Row 50: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: Finding 4 (F4) – Our semantic evaluation metric can capture | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: Stripping
Row 51: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: the essential semantics of binary code summaries, which is more | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: In RQ4 evaluations, we study which symbol type (data types, vari
Row 52: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: suitable for our task than the exact matching-based metrics. | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: able names, and function names) contributes the most to binary
Row 53: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: function semantics by exclusively stripping symbols of each type
Row 54: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: We first treat the decompiled code with all symbols as the original
Row 55: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: A.7 Case Study of GPT-4 Results | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: code. Subsequently, to isolate the impact of each symbol type, we
Row 56: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: eliminate the respective symbols from the original code by substi
Row 57: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: In RQ2 evaluations, it is surprising to observe that GPT-4 is not | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 58: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: tuting them with non-informative symbols. These non-informative
Row 59: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: the best model, especially when ChatGPT outclasses GPT-4 on the | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 60: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: symbols follows the same pattern as these in decompiler-generated
Row 61: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: binaries with symbols. For this, we have conducted a case study to | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 62: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: symbols for stripped binaries. Specifically, for function names, we
Row 63: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: manually investigate the GPT-4 results. Overall, we observe that | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 64: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: replace the original names with symbol Fun_addr in which addr is
Row 65: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: GPT-4 occasionally focuses more on noisy details rather than cap- | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 66: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: the address of functions. For variable names, we replace the original
Row 67: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: turing the global semantics of binary functions. Table 12 presents | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 68: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: names with symbol Var_idx where idx is the index of variables in
Row 69: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: three types of such cases, showcasing GPT-4 generated summaries | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 70: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: the function. For data types, we replace the original types with the
Row 71: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: and ground truth along with those generated by ChatGPT for com- | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 72: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,: symbol undefined.
Row 73: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: parison. For function 1, we find that GPT-4 explains the imple- | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
Row 74: surprising to observe that LLM-generated summaries depict op-: mentation details of the input binary code, instead of providing a | 1 void FUN_0000ea01(undefined4 param_1,undefined4 param_2,undefined4 param_3,:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 18]
Table 6: Examples of LLM-generated Summaries for Source Code and Evaluation Scores. Semantic overlaps are highlighted. We
investigated sample summaries by the highest (100th percentile), median (50th percentile), and lowest (0th percentile) text
similarity scores.
ID Score
Range
Groud Truth Summary LLM-generated Summary Semantic
Similarity
BLEU METEOR ROUGE-L
1 Highest This functionfrees all memory
allocated for givenhash table. Naturally
the hash table mustalready exist.
The function deletes ahash table. It
iterates over the table entries, applies a
delete functionif it exists, and then
frees the memoryfor the entries and
the table itself using the appropriate free
function.
0.833 0.222 0.212 0.226
2 Median Internal routinetoget a filename
from open_files
The functionreturnsthe name of
the fileassociated with the given file
pointer. It checks if the file pointer
matches with standard input, output, or
error, otherwise returns "<unknown>".
0.483 0.000 0.000 0.051
3 Skip charactersuntil the index becomes
greater than NEW_RAW_IDX.
Return the index.
The function advances through a string,
skipping charactersuntil a specified
index. It handles multibyte characters and
updates the last wide character processed.
It returns thenew raw buffer index.
0.483 0.167 0.348 0.318
4 Lowest Inserta BFD into the cache. The functioninsertsan object into a
doubly linked list. If the list is empty, it
creates a new list with the object as the
only element. Otherwise, it adds the
object to the end of the list.
0.011 0.079 0.217 0.136
Table 7: Examples of LLM-generated Summaries for Decompiled Code with Debugging Symbols and Evaluation Scores.
Semantic overlaps are highlighted. LLMs can capture sufficient semantics of samples with the best and median text similarity scores.
ID Score
Range
Groud Truth Summary LLM-generated Summary Semantic
Similarity
BLEU METEOR ROUGE-L
1 Highest This functionclears a specified slotin a
hash table. It is useful when you’ve
already done the lookup and don’t want
to do it again.
The functionclears a slotin a
hash table. If the slot is within the
table’s range and its value is greater than
a constant, it deletes the slot’s content,
replaces it with a constant, and
increments the deletion counter.
0.864 0.321 0.308 0.226
2 Median Allocate N bytes of memory
dynamically, witherror checking.
The functionallocates memory of
size ’n’using malloc. If allocation fails, it
attempts to fixthe null allocation
before returning the pointer.
0.465 0.087 0.144 0.125
3 Get the contents of a sectionin an
Intel Hex file.
The functionreads a sectionfrom an
Intel HEX file, allocates memory for it,
and copies the contents to a specified
location. It handles errors and performs
stack check failure.
0.465 0.167 0.492 0.341
4 Lowest Find the first occurrence of NEEDLE in
HAYSTACK.
The function halts the program execution
when it encounters bad instruction data,
truncating the control flow.
-0.038 0.063 0.057 0.083
When we apply our chosen prompt to this function, ChatGPT generates a summary, as demonstrated in row 1 of Table 13. However,
the generated summary undergoes a substantial transformation
when we make a simple adjustment: changing the original function
name, FUN_0000ea01 into alternative names such as quick_sort,
print_log, and DNS_flood. As depicted in rows 2 to 4 of Table 13,
the resulting binary code summaries closely resemble the semantics of the manipulated function names, but they fail to accurately
reflect the true semantics preserved within the function body.
This discovery underscores the susceptibility of LLM-generated
summaries to manipulation through function name changes. In
light of this vulnerability, adversaries could potentially modify the
DWARF entries of malware binaries, thereby misleading LLMs and
evading detection of malicious behavior.

[TABLE page=18 index=1]
Columns: ID | Score | Groud Truth Summary | LLM-generated Summary | Semantic | BLEU | METEOR | ROUGE-L
Row 1: ID: | Score: Range | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: Similarity | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 2: ID: 1.0 | Score: Highest | Groud Truth Summary: This function frees all memory | LLM-generated Summary: The function deletes a hash table. It | Semantic: 0.833 | BLEU: 0.222 | METEOR: 0.212 | ROUGE-L: 0.226
Row 3: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: allocated for given hash table. Naturally | LLM-generated Summary: iterates over the table entries, applies a | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 4: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: the hash table must already exist. | LLM-generated Summary: delete function if it exists, and then | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 5: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: frees the memory for the entries and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 6: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: the table itself using the appropriate free | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 7: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: function. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 8: ID: 2.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Internal routine to get a filename | LLM-generated Summary: The function returns the name of | Semantic: 0.483 | BLEU: 0.0 | METEOR: 0.0 | ROUGE-L: 0.051
Row 9: ID: | Score: Median | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 10: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: from open_files | LLM-generated Summary: the file associated with the given file | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 11: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: pointer. It checks if the file pointer | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 12: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: matches with standard input, output, or | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 13: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: error, otherwise returns "<unknown>". | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 14: ID: 3.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Skip characters until the index becomes | LLM-generated Summary: The function advances through a string, | Semantic: 0.483 | BLEU: 0.167 | METEOR: 0.348 | ROUGE-L: 0.318
Row 15: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: greater than NEW_RAW_IDX. | LLM-generated Summary: skipping characters until a specified | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 16: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Return the index. | LLM-generated Summary: index. It handles multibyte characters and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 17: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: updates the last wide character processed. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 18: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: It returns the new raw buffer index. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 19: ID: 4.0 | Score: Lowest | Groud Truth Summary: Insert a BFD into the cache. | LLM-generated Summary: The function inserts an object into a | Semantic: 0.011 | BLEU: 0.079 | METEOR: 0.217 | ROUGE-L: 0.136
Row 20: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: doubly linked list. If the list is empty, it | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 21: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: creates a new list with the object as the | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 22: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: only element. Otherwise, it adds the | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 23: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: object to the end of the list. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=18 index=2]
Columns: ID | Score | Groud Truth Summary | LLM-generated Summary | Semantic | BLEU | METEOR | ROUGE-L
Row 1: ID: | Score: Range | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: Similarity | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 2: ID: 1.0 | Score: Highest | Groud Truth Summary: This function clears a specified slot in a | LLM-generated Summary: The function clears a slot in a | Semantic: 0.864 | BLEU: 0.321 | METEOR: 0.308 | ROUGE-L: 0.226
Row 3: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: hash table. It is useful when you’ve | LLM-generated Summary: hash table. If the slot is within the | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 4: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: already done the lookup and don’t want | LLM-generated Summary: table’s range and its value is greater than | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 5: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: to do it again. | LLM-generated Summary: a constant, it deletes the slot’s content, | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 6: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: replaces it with a constant, and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 7: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: increments the deletion counter. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 8: ID: 2.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Allocate N bytes of memory | LLM-generated Summary: The function allocates memory of | Semantic: 0.465 | BLEU: 0.087 | METEOR: 0.144 | ROUGE-L: 0.125
Row 9: ID: | Score: Median | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 10: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: dynamically, with error checking. | LLM-generated Summary: size ’n’ using malloc. If allocation fails, it | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 11: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: attempts to fix the null allocation | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 12: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: before returning the pointer. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 13: ID: 3.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Get the contents of a section in an | LLM-generated Summary: The function reads a section from an | Semantic: 0.465 | BLEU: 0.167 | METEOR: 0.492 | ROUGE-L: 0.341
Row 14: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Intel Hex file. | LLM-generated Summary: Intel HEX file, allocates memory for it, | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 15: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: and copies the contents to a specified | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 16: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: location. It handles errors and performs | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 17: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: stack check failure. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 18: ID: 4.0 | Score: Lowest | Groud Truth Summary: Find the first occurrence of NEEDLE in | LLM-generated Summary: The function halts the program execution | Semantic: -0.038 | BLEU: 0.063 | METEOR: 0.057 | ROUGE-L: 0.083
Row 19: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: HAYSTACK. | LLM-generated Summary: when it encounters bad instruction data, | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 20: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: truncating the control flow. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 19]
Table 8: Examples of LLM-generated Summaries for Decompiled Code from Stripped Binaries and Evaluation Scores.
Semantic overlaps are highlighted. Unlike source code and decompiled code with debugging symbols, LLM-generated summaries for decompiled code from stripped binaries cannot explicitly match ground-truth summaries.
ID Score
Range
Groud Truth Summary LLM-generated Summary Semantic
Similarity
BLEU METEOR ROUGE-L
1 100-th Copyprivatesectioninformation. This
copies over the entsize field, and
sometimes the info field.
The function checks if certain conditions
are met for parameters at
specific memory locations. If true, it
copies data from one location to
anotherand calls another function.
0.763 0.071 0.092 0.093
2 50-th Return thecanonicalabsolute name of
file NAME. A canonical name does not
contain any ". ", ".. " components nor any
repeated file name separators (’/’) or
symlinks. All components must exist. The
result is malloc’d.
The function takes afile nameas input
and attempts tocanonicalizeit, but
encounters bad instruction data and halts
execution.
0.243 0.073 0.111 0.148
3 Set up anELFinternal section header for
a section.
The function checks and manipulates
various parameters and flags related to
ELF(Executable and Linkable Format)
files. It performs operations like string
length calculation, memory copying, error
and warning handling, and calls other
functions for further processing.
0.183 0.045 0.049 0.065
4 0-th Return the number of buckets in the hash
table. The table size, the total number of
buckets (used plus unused), or the
maximum number of slots, are the same
quantity.
The function returns the value at the
memory location offset by 0x10 from the
input long integer parameter.
-0.141 0.114 0.087 0.167
Table 9: Examples of LLM-generated Summaries for IR Code and Evaluation Scores. Semantic overlaps are highlighted. The
generated summaries for IR code mostly describe low-level operations. e.g., data movement and arithmetic operations.
ID Score
Range
Groud Truth Summary LLM-generated Summary Semantic
Similarity
BLEU METEOR ROUGE-L
1 Highest This functionneeds to check if the
ciphers required are actually available
The functionperforms various
operations including moving, subtracting,
loading, extending, shifting, setting,
adding, and or-ing values. It also calls the
’ssl3_get_cipher_by_id’ function.
0.361 0.091 0.068 0.154
2 Median Complain about a programming error and
exit.
The function performs a series of data
manipulations and arithmetic operations,
including addition, subtraction, and
bitwise operations. It also includes
conditional jumps, function calls, and
memory load/store operations. The
function ends with an indirect jump.
0.106 0.029 0.051 0.047
3 Initializes the iterator, but one has to call
next to get to the first element.
The function performs a series of data
movements, arithmetic operations, and
memory store/load operations. It also
includes a non-operational instruction
(nop) and an indirect jump (ijmp).
0.098 0.000 0.029 0.047
4 Lowest Create a new index list containing only a
given index.
The function allocates memory for two
integers, initializes them to 1, and then
stores them in a dynamically allocated
array. It then retrieves the values,
performs some arithmetic operations, and
finally returns the results.
-0.018 0.029 0.040 0.045

[TABLE page=19 index=1]
Columns: ID | Score | Groud Truth Summary | LLM-generated Summary | Semantic | BLEU | METEOR | ROUGE-L
Row 1: ID: | Score: Range | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: Similarity | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 2: ID: 1.0 | Score: 100-th | Groud Truth Summary: Copy private section information. This | LLM-generated Summary: The function checks if certain conditions | Semantic: 0.763 | BLEU: 0.071 | METEOR: 0.092 | ROUGE-L: 0.093
Row 3: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: copies over the entsize field, and | LLM-generated Summary: are met for parameters at | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 4: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: sometimes the info field. | LLM-generated Summary: specific memory locations. If true, it | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 5: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: copies data from one location to | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 6: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: another and calls another function. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 7: ID: 2.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Return the canonical absolute name of | LLM-generated Summary: The function takes a file name as input | Semantic: 0.243 | BLEU: 0.073 | METEOR: 0.111 | ROUGE-L: 0.148
Row 8: ID: | Score: 50-th | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 9: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: file NAME. A canonical name does not | LLM-generated Summary: and attempts to canonicalize it, but | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 10: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: contain any ".", ".." components nor any | LLM-generated Summary: encounters bad instruction data and halts | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 11: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: repeated file name separators (’/’) or | LLM-generated Summary: execution. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 12: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: symlinks. All components must exist. The | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 13: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: result is malloc’d. | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 14: ID: 3.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Set up an ELF internal section header for | LLM-generated Summary: The function checks and manipulates | Semantic: 0.183 | BLEU: 0.045 | METEOR: 0.049 | ROUGE-L: 0.065
Row 15: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: a section. | LLM-generated Summary: various parameters and flags related to | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 16: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: ELF (Executable and Linkable Format) | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 17: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: files. It performs operations like string | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 18: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: length calculation, memory copying, error | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 19: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: and warning handling, and calls other | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 20: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: functions for further processing. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 21: ID: 4.0 | Score: 0-th | Groud Truth Summary: Return the number of buckets in the hash | LLM-generated Summary: The function returns the value at the | Semantic: -0.141 | BLEU: 0.114 | METEOR: 0.087 | ROUGE-L: 0.167
Row 22: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: table. The table size, the total number of | LLM-generated Summary: memory location offset by 0x10 from the | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 23: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: buckets (used plus unused), or the | LLM-generated Summary: input long integer parameter. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 24: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: maximum number of slots, are the same | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 25: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: quantity. | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=19 index=2]
Columns: ID | Score | Groud Truth Summary | LLM-generated Summary | Semantic | BLEU | METEOR | ROUGE-L
Row 1: ID: | Score: Range | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: Similarity | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 2: ID: 1.0 | Score: Highest | Groud Truth Summary: This function needs to check if the | LLM-generated Summary: The function performs various | Semantic: 0.361 | BLEU: 0.091 | METEOR: 0.068 | ROUGE-L: 0.154
Row 3: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: ciphers required are actually available | LLM-generated Summary: operations including moving, subtracting, | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 4: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: loading, extending, shifting, setting, | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 5: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: adding, and or-ing values. It also calls the | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 6: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: ’ssl3_get_cipher_by_id’ function. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 7: ID: 2.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Complain about a programming error and | LLM-generated Summary: The function performs a series of data | Semantic: 0.106 | BLEU: 0.029 | METEOR: 0.051 | ROUGE-L: 0.047
Row 8: ID: | Score: Median | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 9: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: exit. | LLM-generated Summary: manipulations and arithmetic operations, | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 10: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: including addition, subtraction, and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 11: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: bitwise operations. It also includes | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 12: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: conditional jumps, function calls, and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 13: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: memory load/store operations. The | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 14: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: function ends with an indirect jump. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 15: ID: 3.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Initializes the iterator, but one has to call | LLM-generated Summary: The function performs a series of data | Semantic: 0.098 | BLEU: 0.0 | METEOR: 0.029 | ROUGE-L: 0.047
Row 16: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: next to get to the first element. | LLM-generated Summary: movements, arithmetic operations, and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 17: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: memory store/load operations. It also | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 18: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: includes a non-operational instruction | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 19: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: (nop) and an indirect jump (ijmp). | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 20: ID: 4.0 | Score: Lowest | Groud Truth Summary: Create a new index list containing only a | LLM-generated Summary: The function allocates memory for two | Semantic: -0.018 | BLEU: 0.029 | METEOR: 0.04 | ROUGE-L: 0.045
Row 21: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: given index. | LLM-generated Summary: integers, initializes them to 1, and then | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 22: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: stores them in a dynamically allocated | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 23: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: array. It then retrieves the values, | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 24: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: performs some arithmetic operations, and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 25: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: finally returns the results. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 20]
Table 10: Examples of LLM-generated Summaries for Assembly Code and Evaluation Scores. Semantic overlaps are highlighted.
While the generated summaries mostly describe low-level operations, LLMs can sometimes capture high-level data structures
and their properties, such as strings and length, in assembly code.
ID Score
Range
Groud Truth Summary LLM-generated Summary Semantic
Similarity
BLEU METEOR ROUGE-L
1 Highest Return thelength(in bytes) of the
character at the start of the * given
string, and return acopyof this
character in *thechar.
The functioncopiesa stringfrom source
to destination, with alengthdetermined
by a function call, and handles potential
errors.
0.580 0.118 0.102 0.133
2 Median Return a string describing the parameter
type.
The function compares a value with 0x75,
performs a jump if above, calculates an
address using a scaled index, adds to a
register, and returns various memory
addresses.
0.113 0.042 0.072 0.067
3 Print the first N statements in statement
list S to STDERR. If N == 0, nothing is
printed. If N <0, the entire list is printed.
Intended to be called from GDB.
The function performs a series of data
movements, comparisons, and conditional
jumps. It also calls another function at
0x0003f700 twice, possibly for data
processing.
0.101 0.000 0.031 0.073
4 Lowest Add ’pattern’ to the list of patterns for
which files that match are not listed.
The function saves a value, performs a
call operation, updates memory locations
with specific register values, and then
restores the initial value.
-0.145 0.045 0.032 0.054
Table 11: Examples of LLM-generated Summaries for Raw Bytes and Evaluation Scores. Semantic overlaps are highlighted.
Compared to assembly code summaries, the summaries of raw bytes exhibit similar operational descriptions, which exhibit
the implicit code-lifting process by LLMs.
ID Score
Range
Groud Truth Summary LLM-generated Summary Semantic
Similarity
BLEU METEOR ROUGE-L
1 Highest Return 1 ifSTRINGcontains an
absolute pathname, else 0. Used by ‘cd’
to decide whether or not to look up a
directory name in $CDPATH.
The function checks if theinput
string starts with a period or slash,
and if the second character (if exists) is
also a period or slash.
0.592 0.161 0.307 0.217
2 Median Determine if s2 occurs in s1. If so, return
a pointer to the match in s1. The compare
is case insensitive.
The function sets up a stack frame,
performs two function calls, executes a
loop with conditional jumps and
arithmetic operations, and then cleans up
the stack frame.
0.113 0.111 0.069 0.083
3 Free any storage consumed by PARSER
(but not PARSER itself).
The function performs various operations
on memory addresses, including
comparisons, conditional jumps, and
function calls. It also manipulates and
checks specific bits in the data.
0.104 0.000 0.000 0.000
4 Lowest Add a volume label to a part of
multi-volume archive
The function performs several memory
operations, calls to other functions, and
arithmetic operations. It also includes
error checking and stack frame
management.
-0.095 0.045 0.089 0.061
Finding 6 ( F6) – Summaries generated by ChatGPT are susceptible to manipulation via alterations in decompiled code function
names.
A.11 Other Prompt Engineering Techniques
We also examine whether the other prompt engineering techniques
can help LLMs understand binary code. Specifically, we focus on
two popular techniques, including few-shot learning and chain-ofthought prompting. Few-shot prompting was initially introduced to
enhance the generalizability of GPT-3 for tasks beyond its primary
domain [27]. This is achieved by imparting the model with contextual knowledge through in-context instructions and demonstration
samples. To be more specific, few-shot learning entails the inclusion
of a system instruction I along with either 𝑛 in-context demonstration pairs (X𝑑, Y𝑑), where X𝑑 and Y𝑑 represent sample inputs
and outputs. This augmentation occurs prior to the introduction of
the test input:
𝑥 = {I; (𝑥𝑖
𝑑, 𝑦𝑖
𝑑 )𝑛
𝑖=1; 𝑥𝑡 } (7)

[TABLE page=20 index=1]
Columns: ID | Score | Groud Truth Summary | LLM-generated Summary | Semantic | BLEU | METEOR | ROUGE-L
Row 1: ID: | Score: Range | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: Similarity | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 2: ID: 1.0 | Score: Highest | Groud Truth Summary: Return the length (in bytes) of the | LLM-generated Summary: The function copies a string from source | Semantic: 0.580 | BLEU: 0.118 | METEOR: 0.102 | ROUGE-L: 0.133
Row 3: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: character at the start of the * given | LLM-generated Summary: to destination, with a length determined | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 4: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: string, and return a copy of this | LLM-generated Summary: by a function call, and handles potential | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 5: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: character in *thechar. | LLM-generated Summary: errors. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 6: ID: 2.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Return a string describing the parameter | LLM-generated Summary: The function compares a value with 0x75, | Semantic: 0.113 | BLEU: 0.042 | METEOR: 0.072 | ROUGE-L: 0.067
Row 7: ID: | Score: Median | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 8: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: type. | LLM-generated Summary: performs a jump if above, calculates an | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 9: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: address using a scaled index, adds to a | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 10: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: register, and returns various memory | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 11: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: addresses. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 12: ID: 3.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Print the first N statements in statement | LLM-generated Summary: The function performs a series of data | Semantic: 0.101 | BLEU: 0.0 | METEOR: 0.031 | ROUGE-L: 0.073
Row 13: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: list S to STDERR. If N == 0, nothing is | LLM-generated Summary: movements, comparisons, and conditional | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 14: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: printed. If N <0, the entire list is printed. | LLM-generated Summary: jumps. It also calls another function at | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 15: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Intended to be called from GDB. | LLM-generated Summary: 0x0003f700 twice, possibly for data | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 16: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: processing. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 17: ID: 4.0 | Score: Lowest | Groud Truth Summary: Add ’pattern’ to the list of patterns for | LLM-generated Summary: The function saves a value, performs a | Semantic: -0.145 | BLEU: 0.045 | METEOR: 0.032 | ROUGE-L: 0.054
Row 18: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: which files that match are not listed. | LLM-generated Summary: call operation, updates memory locations | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 19: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: with specific register values, and then | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 20: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: restores the initial value. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=20 index=2]
Columns: ID | Score | Groud Truth Summary | LLM-generated Summary | Semantic | BLEU | METEOR | ROUGE-L
Row 1: ID: | Score: Range | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: Similarity | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 2: ID: 1.0 | Score: Highest | Groud Truth Summary: Return 1 if STRING contains an | LLM-generated Summary: The function checks if the input | Semantic: 0.592 | BLEU: 0.161 | METEOR: 0.307 | ROUGE-L: 0.217
Row 3: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: absolute pathname, else 0. Used by ‘cd’ | LLM-generated Summary: string starts with a period or slash, | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 4: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: to decide whether or not to look up a | LLM-generated Summary: and if the second character (if exists) is | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 5: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: directory name in $CDPATH. | LLM-generated Summary: also a period or slash. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 6: ID: 2.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Determine if s2 occurs in s1. If so, return | LLM-generated Summary: The function sets up a stack frame, | Semantic: 0.113 | BLEU: 0.111 | METEOR: 0.069 | ROUGE-L: 0.083
Row 7: ID: | Score: Median | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 8: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: a pointer to the match in s1. The compare | LLM-generated Summary: performs two function calls, executes a | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 9: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: is case insensitive. | LLM-generated Summary: loop with conditional jumps and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 10: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: arithmetic operations, and then cleans up | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 11: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: the stack frame. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 12: ID: 3.0 | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: Free any storage consumed by PARSER | LLM-generated Summary: The function performs various operations | Semantic: 0.104 | BLEU: 0.0 | METEOR: 0.0 | ROUGE-L: 0.0
Row 13: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: (but not PARSER itself). | LLM-generated Summary: on memory addresses, including | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 14: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: comparisons, conditional jumps, and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 15: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: function calls. It also manipulates and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 16: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: checks specific bits in the data. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 17: ID: 4.0 | Score: Lowest | Groud Truth Summary: Add a volume label to a part of | LLM-generated Summary: The function performs several memory | Semantic: -0.095 | BLEU: 0.045 | METEOR: 0.089 | ROUGE-L: 0.061
Row 18: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: multi-volume archive | LLM-generated Summary: operations, calls to other functions, and | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 19: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: arithmetic operations. It also includes | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 20: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: error checking and stack frame | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
Row 21: ID: | Score: | Groud Truth Summary: | LLM-generated Summary: management. | Semantic: | BLEU: | METEOR: | ROUGE-L:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 21]
Table 12: Examples of Summaries Generated by GPT-4 and ChatGPT for Binaries with Symbols. The red text highlights the
noisy details that do not appear in the ground truth summaries, and semantic overlaps are also highlighted.
ID Groud Truth Summary LLM-generated Summary Semantic Similarity
GPT-4 ChatGPT GPT-4 ChatGPT
1 Clearthe stream’sungetc buffer,
preservingthe value of ftello (fp).
Checks if a specific flag is set for a file
pointer. If the flag is set, it repositions the
file pointer without changing its current
position.
Clears the ungetc bufferof a file while
preservingthe current position if the file
has the _IO_UNGETC flag set.
0.375 0.647
2 Return quoting optionsforSTYLE,
with no extra quoting.
Initializes aquoting_optionsstructure
based on the providedquoting_style. If
the style is ’custom_quoting_style’, it
aborts. It also performs stack protection
checks.
Returnsa structure with
quoting optionsbased on the input
quoting style.
0.457 0.637
3 Set program_name, based onargv[0].
argv0 must be astringallocated with
indefinite extent, and must not be
modified after this call.
Sets the program namebased on the
inputstring. It checks for specific
substrings and adjusts the program name
accordingly. If the input is null, it writes
an error message and aborts.
Set program namebased on the
input argument, handling different
cases and conditions. Print error message
and abort if the argument is NULL.
0.536 0.611
Table 13: ChatGPT Generates Different Summaries Given the Same Decompiled Code with Different Function Names. Given
the original function name FUN_0000ea01, ChatGPT generates a summary by analyzing the decompiled function. However,
when we change this function name to quick_sort, print_log, and DNS_flood, ChatGPT produces summaries which are closely
align with the manipulated function names. The key summary semantics manipulations have been highlighted .
ID Function Name Summary
1 FUN_0000ea01 This function takes multiple parameters, assigns some values to local variables, calls another function,
increments a global variable, and prints an error message.
2 quick_sort Sorts an array using the quicksort algorithm. Displays an error message if an error occurs.
3 print_log Print logwith error message and parameters, increment a counter, and handle stack check failure.
4 DNS_flood DNS flood functionwith input parameters, local variables, and a call to the ‘err‘ function to print an error
message.
where the system instructionI and demonstration samples (𝑥𝑖
𝑑, 𝑦𝑖
𝑑 )
are concatenated with the test input 𝑥𝑡 to form the query input 𝑥.
Figure 15b presents the example prompt that we used to perform
few-shot prompting. Instead of using fixed demonstration examples,
we randomly sample two pairs of example binary functions and
summaries for each test binary code to avoid LLMs learning the
unchanged pattern in the demonstration examples.
Chain-of-thought prompting is proposed to resolve complex
reasoning problems by breaking them down into intermediate
steps [77]. In the context of binary code understanding, we ask
LLMs to perform an additional step of reasoning the input code
semantics before generating the final code summaries. For this,
we first send one request asking LLMs to reason about the code
semantics, in which we use the popular reasoning prompt “Let’s
think step by step”. Upon receiving the response, we parse the
generated code reasoning results and concatenate them into the
second request inquiring about the code summaries. Figure 15c
presents the sample of our chat-of-thought prompts. The baseline
is the zero-shot prompt. As exemplified in Figure 15a, we directly
concatenate the prompt with the test code to generate the request
as the baseline approach.

[TABLE page=21 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | LLM-generated Summary | Unnamed: 3 | Semantic Similarity
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: ID | Unnamed: 1: Groud Truth Summary | Unnamed: 2: | LLM-generated Summary: | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: GPT-4 | LLM-generated Summary: ChatGPT | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity: GPT-4 ChatGPT
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: 1 | Unnamed: 1: Clear the stream’s ungetc buffer, | Unnamed: 2: Checks if a specific flag is set for a file | LLM-generated Summary: Clears the ungetc buffer of a file while | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity: 0.375 0.647
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: preserving the value of ftello (fp). | Unnamed: 2: pointer. If the flag is set, it repositions the | LLM-generated Summary: preserving the current position if the file | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: file pointer without changing its current | LLM-generated Summary: has the _IO_UNGETC flag set. | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: position. | LLM-generated Summary: | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: 2 | Unnamed: 1: Return quoting options for STYLE, | Unnamed: 2: Initializes a quoting_options structure | LLM-generated Summary: Returns a structure with | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity: 0.457 0.637
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: with no extra quoting. | Unnamed: 2: based on the provided quoting_style. If | LLM-generated Summary: quoting options based on the input | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: the style is ’custom_quoting_style’, it | LLM-generated Summary: quoting style. | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: aborts. It also performs stack protection | LLM-generated Summary: | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: checks. | LLM-generated Summary: | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: 3 | Unnamed: 1: Set program_name, based on argv[0]. | Unnamed: 2: Sets the program name based on the | LLM-generated Summary: Set program name based on the | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity: 0.536 0.611
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: argv0 must be a string allocated with | Unnamed: 2: input string. It checks for specific | LLM-generated Summary: input argument, handling different | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: indefinite extent, and must not be | Unnamed: 2: substrings and adjusts the program name | LLM-generated Summary: cases and conditions. Print error message | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: modified after this call. | Unnamed: 2: accordingly. If the input is null, it writes | LLM-generated Summary: and abort if the argument is NULL. | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: an error message and aborts. | LLM-generated Summary: | Unnamed: 3: | Semantic Similarity:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=21 index=2]
Columns: ID | Function Name | Summary
Row 1: ID: 1.0 | Function Name: FUN_0000ea01 | Summary: This function takes multiple parameters, assigns some values to local variables, calls another function,
Row 2: ID: | Function Name: | Summary: increments a global variable, and prints an error message.
Row 3: ID: 2.0 | Function Name: quick_sort | Summary: Sorts an array using the quicksort algorithm. Displays an error message if an error occurs.
Row 4: ID: 3.0 | Function Name: print_log | Summary: Print log with error message and parameters, increment a counter, and handle stack check failure.
Row 5: ID: 4.0 | Function Name: DNS_flood | Summary: DNS flood function with input parameters, local variables, and a call to the ‘err‘ function to print an error
Row 6: ID: | Function Name: | Summary: message.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 22]
ModelInputImagine you are a skilled binary reverse engineer. I will provide you with a binary function, and your task is to analyze it thoroughly, explain its underlying functionality, and then deliver a succinct and informative summary of its operation.Test input code: <CODE>
(a) Zero-shot Prompting
ModelInputImagine you are a skilled binary reverse engineer. I will provide you with a binary function, and your task is to analyze it thoroughly, explain its underlying functionality, and then deliver a succinct and informative summary of its operation.Example code 1: <EXMAPLE_CODE_1> Example summary 1: <EXMAPLE_SUMMRY_1> Example code 2: <EXMAPLE_CODE_2> Example summary 2: <EXMAPLE_SUMMRY_2>Test input code: <CODE> (b) Few-shot Prompting
ModelInput
ModelOutputThiscodedefinesafunctionthattakestwoparameters,bothoftype“ulong”…
ModelInput
Imagine you are a skilled binary reverse engineer. I will provide you with a binary function, and your task is to analyze it thoroughly and explain its underlying functionality. Let's think step by step. Test input code: <CODE>
Imagine you are a skilled binary reverse engineer. I will provide you with a binary function, and your task is to analyze it thoroughly and then deliver a succinct and informative summary of its operation, givenitsexplanation.Explanation: Thiscodedefinesafunctionthattakestwoparameters,bothoftype“ulong”…Test inputcode:<CODE> (c) Chain-of-thought Prompting
Figure 15: Example of Zero-shot, Few-shot, and Chain-of-thought Prompting. For few-shot prompting, we add pairs of
demonstration examples. For chain-of-thought prompting, we send two requests to LLMs. The first request asks for an
explanation of the test input code, which will be parsed and concatenated into the second request, inquiring the code summaries.