[PAGE 1]
Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Large
Language Models: A Survey
Yunfan Gaoa, Yun Xiong b, Xinyu Gao b, Kangxiang Jia b, Jinliu Pan b, Yuxi Bi c, Yi Dai a, Jiawei Sun a, Meng
Wangc, and Haofen Wang a,c
aShanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji University
bShanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
cCollege of Design and Innovation, Tongji University
Abstract—Large Language Models (LLMs) showcase impressive capabilities but encounter challenges like hallucination,
outdated knowledge, and non-transparent, untraceable reasoning
processes. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has emerged
as a promising solution by incorporating knowledge from external
databases. This enhances the accuracy and credibility of the
generation, particularly for knowledge-intensive tasks, and allows
for continuous knowledge updates and integration of domainspecific information. RAG synergistically merges LLMs’ intrinsic knowledge with the vast, dynamic repositories of external
databases. This comprehensive review paper offers a detailed
examination of the progression of RAG paradigms, encompassing
the Naive RAG, the Advanced RAG, and the Modular RAG.
It meticulously scrutinizes the tripartite foundation of RAG
frameworks, which includes the retrieval, the generation and the
augmentation techniques. The paper highlights the state-of-theart technologies embedded in each of these critical components,
providing a profound understanding of the advancements in RAG
systems. Furthermore, this paper introduces up-to-date evaluation framework and benchmark. At the end, this article delineates
the challenges currently faced and points out prospective avenues
for research and development 1.
Index Terms—Large language model, retrieval-augmented generation, natural language processing, information retrieval
I. I NTRODUCTION
L
ARGE language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success, though they still face significant limitations,
especially in domain-specific or knowledge-intensive tasks [1],
notably producing “hallucinations” [2] when handling queries
beyond their training data or requiring current information. To
overcome challenges, Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
enhances LLMs by retrieving relevant document chunks from
external knowledge base through semantic similarity calculation. By referencing external knowledge, RAG effectively
reduces the problem of generating factually incorrect content.
Its integration into LLMs has resulted in widespread adoption,
establishing RAG as a key technology in advancing chatbots
and enhancing the suitability of LLMs for real-world applications.
RAG technology has rapidly developed in recent years, and
the technology tree summarizing related research is shown
Corresponding Author.Email:haofen.wang@tongji.edu.cn
1Resources are available at https://github.com/Tongji-KGLLM/
RAG-Survey
in Figure 1. The development trajectory of RAG in the era
of large models exhibits several distinct stage characteristics.
Initially, RAG’s inception coincided with the rise of the
Transformer architecture, focusing on enhancing language
models by incorporating additional knowledge through PreTraining Models (PTM). This early stage was characterized
by foundational work aimed at refining pre-training techniques
[3]–[5].The subsequent arrival of ChatGPT [6] marked a
pivotal moment, with LLM demonstrating powerful in context
learning (ICL) capabilities. RAG research shifted towards
providing better information for LLMs to answer more complex and knowledge-intensive tasks during the inference stage,
leading to rapid development in RAG studies. As research
progressed, the enhancement of RAG was no longer limited
to the inference stage but began to incorporate more with LLM
fine-tuning techniques.
The burgeoning field of RAG has experienced swift growth,
yet it has not been accompanied by a systematic synthesis that
could clarify its broader trajectory. This survey endeavors to
fill this gap by mapping out the RAG process and charting
its evolution and anticipated future paths, with a focus on the
integration of RAG within LLMs. This paper considers both
technical paradigms and research methods, summarizing three
main research paradigms from over 100 RAG studies, and
analyzing key technologies in the core stages of “Retrieval,”
“Generation,” and “Augmentation.” On the other hand, current
research tends to focus more on methods, lacking analysis and
summarization of how to evaluate RAG. This paper comprehensively reviews the downstream tasks, datasets, benchmarks,
and evaluation methods applicable to RAG. Overall, this
paper sets out to meticulously compile and categorize the
foundational technical concepts, historical progression, and
the spectrum of RAG methodologies and applications that
have emerged post-LLMs. It is designed to equip readers and
professionals with a detailed and structured understanding of
both large models and RAG. It aims to illuminate the evolution
of retrieval augmentation techniques, assess the strengths and
weaknesses of various approaches in their respective contexts,
and speculate on upcoming trends and innovations.
Our contributions are as follows:
• In this survey, we present a thorough and systematic
review of the state-of-the-art RAG methods, delineating
its evolution through paradigms including naive RAG,
arXiv:2312.10997v5 [cs.CL] 27 Mar 2024

[PAGE 2]
Fig. 1. Technology tree of RAG research. The stages of involving RAG mainly include pre-training, fine-tuning, and inference. With the emergence of LLMs,
research on RAG initially focused on leveraging the powerful in context learning abilities of LLMs, primarily concentrating on the inference stage. Subsequent
research has delved deeper, gradually integrating more with the fine-tuning of LLMs. Researchers have also been exploring ways to enhance language models
in the pre-training stage through retrieval-augmented techniques.
advanced RAG, and modular RAG. This review contextualizes the broader scope of RAG research within the
landscape of LLMs.
• We identify and discuss the central technologies integral
to the RAG process, specifically focusing on the aspects
of “Retrieval”, “Generation” and “Augmentation”, and
delve into their synergies, elucidating how these components intricately collaborate to form a cohesive and
effective RAG framework.
• We have summarized the current assessment methods of
RAG, covering 26 tasks, nearly 50 datasets, outlining
the evaluation objectives and metrics, as well as the
current evaluation benchmarks and tools. Additionally,
we anticipate future directions for RAG, emphasizing
potential enhancements to tackle current challenges.
The paper unfolds as follows: Section II introduces the
main concept and current paradigms of RAG. The following
three sections explore core components—“Retrieval”, “Generation” and “Augmentation”, respectively. Section III focuses
on optimization methods in retrieval,including indexing, query
and embedding optimization. Section IV concentrates on postretrieval process and LLM fine-tuning in generation. Section V
analyzes the three augmentation processes. Section VI focuses
on RAG’s downstream tasks and evaluation system. Section VII mainly discusses the challenges that RAG currently
faces and its future development directions. At last, the paper
concludes in Section VIII.
II. O VERVIEW OF RAG
A typical application of RAG is illustrated in Figure 2.
Here, a user poses a question to ChatGPT about a recent,
widely discussed news. Given ChatGPT’s reliance on pretraining data, it initially lacks the capacity to provide updates on recent developments. RAG bridges this information
gap by sourcing and incorporating knowledge from external
databases. In this case, it gathers relevant news articles related
to the user’s query. These articles, combined with the original
question, form a comprehensive prompt that empowers LLMs
to generate a well-informed answer.
The RAG research paradigm is continuously evolving, and
we categorize it into three stages: Naive RAG, Advanced
RAG, and Modular RAG, as showed in Figure 3. Despite
RAG method are cost-effective and surpass the performance
of the native LLM, they also exhibit several limitations.
The development of Advanced RAG and Modular RAG is
a response to these specific shortcomings in Naive RAG.
A. Naive RAG
The Naive RAG research paradigm represents the earliest methodology, which gained prominence shortly after the

[PAGE 3]
Fig. 2. A representative instance of the RAG process applied to question answering. It mainly consists of 3 steps. 1) Indexing. Documents are split into chunks,
encoded into vectors, and stored in a vector database. 2) Retrieval. Retrieve the Top k chunks most relevant to the question based on semantic similarity. 3)
Generation. Input the original question and the retrieved chunks together into LLM to generate the final answer.
widespread adoption of ChatGPT. The Naive RAG follows
a traditional process that includes indexing, retrieval, and
generation, which is also characterized as a “Retrieve-Read”
framework [7].
Indexing starts with the cleaning and extraction of raw data
in diverse formats like PDF, HTML, Word, and Markdown,
which is then converted into a uniform plain text format. To
accommodate the context limitations of language models, text
is segmented into smaller, digestible chunks. Chunks are then
encoded into vector representations using an embedding model
and stored in vector database. This step is crucial for enabling
efficient similarity searches in the subsequent retrieval phase.
Retrieval. Upon receipt of a user query, the RAG system
employs the same encoding model utilized during the indexing
phase to transform the query into a vector representation.
It then computes the similarity scores between the query
vector and the vector of chunks within the indexed corpus.
The system prioritizes and retrieves the top K chunks that
demonstrate the greatest similarity to the query. These chunks
are subsequently used as the expanded context in prompt.
Generation. The posed query and selected documents are
synthesized into a coherent prompt to which a large language
model is tasked with formulating a response. The model’s
approach to answering may vary depending on task-specific
criteria, allowing it to either draw upon its inherent parametric
knowledge or restrict its responses to the information contained within the provided documents. In cases of ongoing
dialogues, any existing conversational history can be integrated
into the prompt, enabling the model to engage in multi-turn
dialogue interactions effectively.
However, Naive RAG encounters notable drawbacks:
Retrieval Challenges . The retrieval phase often struggles
with precision and recall, leading to the selection of misaligned
or irrelevant chunks, and the missing of crucial information.
Generation Difficulties. In generating responses, the model
may face the issue of hallucination, where it produces content not supported by the retrieved context. This phase can
also suffer from irrelevance, toxicity, or bias in the outputs,
detracting from the quality and reliability of the responses.
Augmentation Hurdles . Integrating retrieved information
with the different task can be challenging, sometimes resulting
in disjointed or incoherent outputs. The process may also
encounter redundancy when similar information is retrieved
from multiple sources, leading to repetitive responses. Determining the significance and relevance of various passages and
ensuring stylistic and tonal consistency add further complexity.
Facing complex issues, a single retrieval based on the original
query may not suffice to acquire adequate context information.
Moreover, there’s a concern that generation models might
overly rely on augmented information, leading to outputs that
simply echo retrieved content without adding insightful or
synthesized information.
B. Advanced RAG
Advanced RAG introduces specific improvements to overcome the limitations of Naive RAG. Focusing on enhancing retrieval quality, it employs pre-retrieval and post-retrieval strategies. To tackle the indexing issues, Advanced RAG refines
its indexing techniques through the use of a sliding window
approach, fine-grained segmentation, and the incorporation of
metadata. Additionally, it incorporates several optimization
methods to streamline the retrieval process [8].

[PAGE 4]
Fig. 3. Comparison between the three paradigms of RAG. (Left) Naive RAG mainly consists of three parts: indexing, retrieval and generation. (Middle)
Advanced RAG proposes multiple optimization strategies around pre-retrieval and post-retrieval, with a process similar to the Naive RAG, still following a
chain-like structure. (Right) Modular RAG inherits and develops from the previous paradigm, showcasing greater flexibility overall. This is evident in the
introduction of multiple specific functional modules and the replacement of existing modules. The overall process is not limited to sequential retrieval and
generation; it includes methods such as iterative and adaptive retrieval.
Pre-retrieval process. In this stage, the primary focus is
on optimizing the indexing structure and the original query.
The goal of optimizing indexing is to enhance the quality of
the content being indexed. This involves strategies: enhancing
data granularity, optimizing index structures, adding metadata,
alignment optimization, and mixed retrieval. While the goal
of query optimization is to make the user’s original question
clearer and more suitable for the retrieval task. Common
methods include query rewriting query transformation, query
expansion and other techniques [7], [9]–[11].
Post-Retrieval Process. Once relevant context is retrieved,
it’s crucial to integrate it effectively with the query. The main
methods in post-retrieval process include rerank chunks and
context compressing. Re-ranking the retrieved information to
relocate the most relevant content to the edges of the prompt is
a key strategy. This concept has been implemented in frameworks such as LlamaIndex 2, LangChain3, and HayStack [12].
Feeding all relevant documents directly into LLMs can lead
to information overload, diluting the focus on key details with
irrelevant content.To mitigate this, post-retrieval efforts concentrate on selecting the essential information, emphasizing
critical sections, and shortening the context to be processed.
2https://www.llamaindex.ai
3https://www.langchain.com/
C. Modular RAG
The modular RAG architecture advances beyond the former two RAG paradigms, offering enhanced adaptability and
versatility. It incorporates diverse strategies for improving its
components, such as adding a search module for similarity
searches and refining the retriever through fine-tuning. Innovations like restructured RAG modules [13] and rearranged
RAG pipelines [14] have been introduced to tackle specific
challenges. The shift towards a modular RAG approach is
becoming prevalent, supporting both sequential processing and
integrated end-to-end training across its components. Despite
its distinctiveness, Modular RAG builds upon the foundational
principles of Advanced and Naive RAG, illustrating a progression and refinement within the RAG family.
1) New Modules: The Modular RAG framework introduces
additional specialized components to enhance retrieval and
processing capabilities. The Search module adapts to specific scenarios, enabling direct searches across various data
sources like search engines, databases, and knowledge graphs,
using LLM-generated code and query languages [15]. RAGFusion addresses traditional search limitations by employing
a multi-query strategy that expands user queries into diverse
perspectives, utilizing parallel vector searches and intelligent
re-ranking to uncover both explicit and transformative knowledge [16]. The Memory module leverages the LLM’s memory
to guide retrieval, creating an unbounded memory pool that

[PAGE 5]
aligns the text more closely with data distribution through iterative self-enhancement [17], [18]. Routing in the RAG system
navigates through diverse data sources, selecting the optimal
pathway for a query, whether it involves summarization,
specific database searches, or merging different information
streams [19]. The Predict module aims to reduce redundancy
and noise by generating context directly through the LLM,
ensuring relevance and accuracy [13]. Lastly, the Task Adapter
module tailors RAG to various downstream tasks, automating
prompt retrieval for zero-shot inputs and creating task-specific
retrievers through few-shot query generation [20], [21] .This
comprehensive approach not only streamlines the retrieval process but also significantly improves the quality and relevance
of the information retrieved, catering to a wide array of tasks
and queries with enhanced precision and flexibility.
2) New Patterns: Modular RAG offers remarkable adaptability by allowing module substitution or reconfiguration
to address specific challenges. This goes beyond the fixed
structures of Naive and Advanced RAG, characterized by a
simple “Retrieve” and “Read” mechanism. Moreover, Modular
RAG expands this flexibility by integrating new modules or
adjusting interaction flow among existing ones, enhancing its
applicability across different tasks.
Innovations such as the Rewrite-Retrieve-Read [7]model
leverage the LLM’s capabilities to refine retrieval queries
through a rewriting module and a LM-feedback mechanism
to update rewriting model., improving task performance.
Similarly, approaches like Generate-Read [13] replace traditional retrieval with LLM-generated content, while ReciteRead [22] emphasizes retrieval from model weights, enhancing the model’s ability to handle knowledge-intensive tasks.
Hybrid retrieval strategies integrate keyword, semantic, and
vector searches to cater to diverse queries. Additionally, employing sub-queries and hypothetical document embeddings
(HyDE) [11] seeks to improve retrieval relevance by focusing
on embedding similarities between generated answers and real
documents.
Adjustments in module arrangement and interaction, such
as the Demonstrate-Search-Predict (DSP) [23] framework
and the iterative Retrieve-Read-Retrieve-Read flow of ITERRETGEN [14], showcase the dynamic use of module outputs to bolster another module’s functionality, illustrating a
sophisticated understanding of enhancing module synergy.
The flexible orchestration of Modular RAG Flow showcases
the benefits of adaptive retrieval through techniques such as
FLARE [24] and Self-RAG [25]. This approach transcends
the fixed RAG retrieval process by evaluating the necessity
of retrieval based on different scenarios. Another benefit of
a flexible architecture is that the RAG system can more
easily integrate with other technologies (such as fine-tuning
or reinforcement learning) [26]. For example, this can involve
fine-tuning the retriever for better retrieval results, fine-tuning
the generator for more personalized outputs, or engaging in
collaborative fine-tuning [27].
D. RAG vs Fine-tuning
The augmentation of LLMs has attracted considerable attention due to their growing prevalence. Among the optimization
methods for LLMs, RAG is often compared with Fine-tuning
(FT) and prompt engineering. Each method has distinct characteristics as illustrated in Figure 4. We used a quadrant chart to
illustrate the differences among three methods in two dimensions: external knowledge requirements and model adaption
requirements. Prompt engineering leverages a model’s inherent
capabilities with minimum necessity for external knowledge
and model adaption. RAG can be likened to providing a model
with a tailored textbook for information retrieval, ideal for precise information retrieval tasks. In contrast, FT is comparable
to a student internalizing knowledge over time, suitable for
scenarios requiring replication of specific structures, styles, or
formats.
RAG excels in dynamic environments by offering realtime knowledge updates and effective utilization of external
knowledge sources with high interpretability. However, it
comes with higher latency and ethical considerations regarding
data retrieval. On the other hand, FT is more static, requiring
retraining for updates but enabling deep customization of the
model’s behavior and style. It demands significant computational resources for dataset preparation and training, and
while it can reduce hallucinations, it may face challenges with
unfamiliar data.
In multiple evaluations of their performance on various
knowledge-intensive tasks across different topics, [28] revealed that while unsupervised fine-tuning shows some improvement, RAG consistently outperforms it, for both existing knowledge encountered during training and entirely new
knowledge. Additionally, it was found that LLMs struggle
to learn new factual information through unsupervised finetuning. The choice between RAG and FT depends on the
specific needs for data dynamics, customization, and computational capabilities in the application context. RAG and
FT are not mutually exclusive and can complement each
other, enhancing a model’s capabilities at different levels.
In some instances, their combined use may lead to optimal
performance. The optimization process involving RAG and FT
may require multiple iterations to achieve satisfactory results.
III. R ETRIEVAL
In the context of RAG, it is crucial to efficiently retrieve
relevant documents from the data source. There are several
key issues involved, such as the retrieval source, retrieval
granularity, pre-processing of the retrieval, and selection of
the corresponding embedding model.
A. Retrieval Source
RAG relies on external knowledge to enhance LLMs, while
the type of retrieval source and the granularity of retrieval
units both affect the final generation results.
1) Data Structure: Initially, text is s the mainstream source
of retrieval. Subsequently, the retrieval source expanded to include semi-structured data (PDF) and structured data (Knowledge Graph, KG) for enhancement. In addition to retrieving
from original external sources, there is also a growing trend in
recent researches towards utilizing content generated by LLMs
themselves for retrieval and enhancement purposes.

[PAGE 6]
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF RAG METHODS
Method Retrieval Source Retrieval
Data Type
Retrieval
Granularity
Augmentation
Stage
Retrieval
process
CoG [29] Wikipedia Text Phrase Pre-training Iterative
DenseX [30] FactoidWiki Text Proposition Inference Once
EAR [31] Dataset-base Text Sentence Tuning Once
UPRISE [20] Dataset-base Text Sentence Tuning Once
RAST [32] Dataset-base Text Sentence Tuning Once
Self-Mem [17] Dataset-base Text Sentence Tuning Iterative
FLARE [24] Search Engine,Wikipedia Text Sentence Tuning Adaptive
PGRA [33] Wikipedia Text Sentence Inference Once
FILCO [34] Wikipedia Text Sentence Inference Once
RADA [35] Dataset-base Text Sentence Inference Once
Filter-rerank [36] Synthesized dataset Text Sentence Inference Once
R-GQA [37] Dataset-base Text Sentence Pair Tuning Once
LLM-R [38] Dataset-base Text Sentence Pair Inference Iterative
TIGER [39] Dataset-base Text Item-base Pre-training Once
LM-Indexer [40] Dataset-base Text Item-base Tuning Once
BEQUE [9] Dataset-base Text Item-base Tuning Once
CT-RAG [41] Synthesized dataset Text Item-base Tuning Once
Atlas [42] Wikipedia, Common Crawl Text Chunk Pre-training Iterative
RA VEN [43] Wikipedia Text Chunk Pre-training Once
RETRO++ [44] Pre-training Corpus Text Chunk Pre-training Iterative
INSTRUCTRETRO [45] Pre-training corpus Text Chunk Pre-training Iterative
RRR [7] Search Engine Text Chunk Tuning Once
RA-e2e [46] Dataset-base Text Chunk Tuning Once
PROMPTAGATOR [21] BEIR Text Chunk Tuning Once
AAR [47] MSMARCO,Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Once
RA-DIT [27] Common Crawl,Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Once
RAG-Robust [48] Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Once
RA-Long-Form [49] Dataset-base Text Chunk Tuning Once
CoN [50] Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Once
Self-RAG [25] Wikipedia Text Chunk Tuning Adaptive
BGM [26] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
CoQ [51] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Iterative
Token-Elimination [52] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
PaperQA [53] Arxiv,Online Database,PubMed Text Chunk Inference Iterative
NoiseRAG [54] FactoidWiki Text Chunk Inference Once
IAG [55] Search Engine,Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
NoMIRACL [56] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
ToC [57] Search Engine,Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Recursive
SKR [58] Dataset-base,Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Adaptive
ITRG [59] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Iterative
RAG-LongContext [60] Dataset-base Text Chunk Inference Once
ITER-RETGEN [14] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Iterative
IRCoT [61] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Recursive
LLM-Knowledge-Boundary [62] Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Once
RAPTOR [63] Dataset-base Text Chunk Inference Recursive
RECITE [22] LLMs Text Chunk Inference Once
ICRALM [64] Pile,Wikipedia Text Chunk Inference Iterative
Retrieve-and-Sample [65] Dataset-base Text Doc Tuning Once
Zemi [66] C4 Text Doc Tuning Once
CRAG [67] Arxiv Text Doc Inference Once
1-PAGER [68] Wikipedia Text Doc Inference Iterative
PRCA [69] Dataset-base Text Doc Inference Once
QLM-Doc-ranking [70] Dataset-base Text Doc Inference Once
Recomp [71] Wikipedia Text Doc Inference Once
DSP [23] Wikipedia Text Doc Inference Iterative
RePLUG [72] Pile Text Doc Inference Once
ARM-RAG [73] Dataset-base Text Doc Inference Iterative
GenRead [13] LLMs Text Doc Inference Iterative
UniMS-RAG [74] Dataset-base Text Multi Tuning Once
CREA-ICL [19] Dataset-base Crosslingual,Text Sentence Inference Once
PKG [75] LLM Tabular,Text Chunk Inference Once
SANTA [76] Dataset-base Code,Text Item Pre-training Once
SURGE [77] Freebase KG Sub-Graph Tuning Once
MK-ToD [78] Dataset-base KG Entity Tuning Once
Dual-Feedback-ToD [79] Dataset-base KG Entity Sequence Tuning Once
KnowledGPT [15] Dataset-base KG Triplet Inference Muti-time
FABULA [80] Dataset-base,Graph KG Entity Inference Once
HyKGE [81] CMeKG KG Entity Inference Once
KALMV [82] Wikipedia KG Triplet Inference Iterative
RoG [83] Freebase KG Triplet Inference Iterative
G-Retriever [84] Dataset-base TextGraph Sub-Graph Inference Once

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Retrieval | Retrieval.1 | Augmentation | Retrieval.2
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Method | Unnamed: 1: Retrieval Source | Retrieval: | Retrieval.1: | Augmentation: | Retrieval.2:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Retrieval: Data Type | Retrieval.1: Granularity | Augmentation: Stage | Retrieval.2: process
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
Fig. 4. RAG compared with other model optimization methods in the aspects of “External Knowledge Required” and “Model Adaption Required”. Prompt
Engineering requires low modifications to the model and external knowledge, focusing on harnessing the capabilities of LLMs themselves. Fine-tuning, on
the other hand, involves further training the model. In the early stages of RAG (Naive RAG), there is a low demand for model modifications. As research
progresses, Modular RAG has become more integrated with fine-tuning techniques.
Unstructured Data , such as text, is the most widely used
retrieval source, which are mainly gathered from corpus. For
open-domain question-answering (ODQA) tasks, the primary
retrieval sources are Wikipedia Dump with the current major
versions including HotpotQA 4 (1st October , 2017), DPR5 (20
December, 2018). In addition to encyclopedic data, common
unstructured data includes cross-lingual text [19] and domainspecific data (such as medical [67]and legal domains [29]).
Semi-structured data. typically refers to data that contains a
combination of text and table information, such as PDF. Handling semi-structured data poses challenges for conventional
RAG systems due to two main reasons. Firstly, text splitting
processes may inadvertently separate tables, leading to data
corruption during retrieval. Secondly, incorporating tables into
the data can complicate semantic similarity searches. When
dealing with semi-structured data, one approach involves leveraging the code capabilities of LLMs to execute Text-2-SQL
queries on tables within databases, such as TableGPT [85].
Alternatively, tables can be transformed into text format for
further analysis using text-based methods [75]. However, both
of these methods are not optimal solutions, indicating substantial research opportunities in this area.
Structured data , such as knowledge graphs (KGs) [86] ,
which are typically verified and can provide more precise information. KnowledGPT [15] generates KB search queries and
stores knowledge in a personalized base, enhancing the RAG
model’s knowledge richness. In response to the limitations of
LLMs in understanding and answering questions about textual
graphs, G-Retriever [84] integrates Graph Neural Networks
4https://hotpotqa.github.io/wiki-readme.html
5https://github.com/facebookresearch/DPR
(GNNs), LLMs and RAG, enhancing graph comprehension
and question-answering capabilities through soft prompting
of the LLM, and employs the Prize-Collecting Steiner Tree
(PCST) optimization problem for targeted graph retrieval. On
the contrary, it requires additional effort to build, validate,
and maintain structured databases. On the contrary, it requires
additional effort to build, validate, and maintain structured
databases.
LLMs-Generated Content. Addressing the limitations of
external auxiliary information in RAG, some research has
focused on exploiting LLMs’ internal knowledge. SKR [58]
classifies questions as known or unknown, applying retrieval
enhancement selectively. GenRead [13] replaces the retriever
with an LLM generator, finding that LLM-generated contexts
often contain more accurate answers due to better alignment
with the pre-training objectives of causal language modeling.
Selfmem [17] iteratively creates an unbounded memory pool
with a retrieval-enhanced generator, using a memory selector to choose outputs that serve as dual problems to the
original question, thus self-enhancing the generative model.
These methodologies underscore the breadth of innovative
data source utilization in RAG, striving to improve model
performance and task effectiveness.
2) Retrieval Granularity: Another important factor besides
the data format of the retrieval source is the granularity of
the retrieved data. Coarse-grained retrieval units theoretically
can provide more relevant information for the problem, but
they may also contain redundant content, which could distract
the retriever and language models in downstream tasks [50],
[87]. On the other hand, fine-grained retrieval unit granularity
increases the burden of retrieval and does not guarantee semantic integrity and meeting the required knowledge. Choosing

[PAGE 8]
the appropriate retrieval granularity during inference can be
a simple and effective strategy to improve the retrieval and
downstream task performance of dense retrievers.
In text, retrieval granularity ranges from fine to coarse,
including Token, Phrase, Sentence, Proposition, Chunks, Document. Among them, DenseX [30]proposed the concept of
using propositions as retrieval units. Propositions are defined
as atomic expressions in the text, each encapsulating a unique
factual segment and presented in a concise, self-contained natural language format. This approach aims to enhance retrieval
precision and relevance. On the Knowledge Graph (KG),
retrieval granularity includes Entity, Triplet, and sub-Graph.
The granularity of retrieval can also be adapted to downstream
tasks, such as retrieving Item IDs [40]in recommendation tasks
and Sentence pairs [38]. Detailed information is illustrated in
Table I.
B. Indexing Optimization
In the Indexing phase, documents will be processed, segmented, and transformed into Embeddings to be stored in a
vector database. The quality of index construction determines
whether the correct context can be obtained in the retrieval
phase.
1) Chunking Strategy: The most common method is to split
the document into chunks on a fixed number of tokens (e.g.,
100, 256, 512) [88]. Larger chunks can capture more context,
but they also generate more noise, requiring longer processing
time and higher costs. While smaller chunks may not fully
convey the necessary context, they do have less noise. However, chunks leads to truncation within sentences, prompting
the optimization of a recursive splits and sliding window methods, enabling layered retrieval by merging globally related
information across multiple retrieval processes [89]. Nevertheless, these approaches still cannot strike a balance between
semantic completeness and context length. Therefore, methods
like Small2Big have been proposed, where sentences (small)
are used as the retrieval unit, and the preceding and following
sentences are provided as (big) context to LLMs [90].
2) Metadata Attachments: Chunks can be enriched with
metadata information such as page number, file name, author,category timestamp. Subsequently, retrieval can be filtered
based on this metadata, limiting the scope of the retrieval.
Assigning different weights to document timestamps during
retrieval can achieve time-aware RAG, ensuring the freshness
of knowledge and avoiding outdated information.
In addition to extracting metadata from the original documents, metadata can also be artificially constructed. For
example, adding summaries of paragraph, as well as introducing hypothetical questions. This method is also known as
Reverse HyDE. Specifically, using LLM to generate questions
that can be answered by the document, then calculating the
similarity between the original question and the hypothetical
question during retrieval to reduce the semantic gap between
the question and the answer.
3) Structural Index: One effective method for enhancing
information retrieval is to establish a hierarchical structure for
the documents. By constructing In structure, RAG system can
expedite the retrieval and processing of pertinent data.
Hierarchical index structure . File are arranged in parentchild relationships, with chunks linked to them. Data summaries are stored at each node, aiding in the swift traversal
of data and assisting the RAG system in determining which
chunks to extract. This approach can also mitigate the illusion
caused by block extraction issues.
Knowledge Graph index . Utilize KG in constructing the
hierarchical structure of documents contributes to maintaining
consistency. It delineates the connections between different
concepts and entities, markedly reducing the potential for
illusions. Another advantage is the transformation of the
information retrieval process into instructions that LLM can
comprehend, thereby enhancing the accuracy of knowledge
retrieval and enabling LLM to generate contextually coherent
responses, thus improving the overall efficiency of the RAG
system. To capture the logical relationship between document
content and structure, KGP [91] proposed a method of building
an index between multiple documents using KG. This KG
consists of nodes (representing paragraphs or structures in the
documents, such as pages and tables) and edges (indicating
semantic/lexical similarity between paragraphs or relationships
within the document structure), effectively addressing knowledge retrieval and reasoning problems in a multi-document
environment.
C. Query Optimization
One of the primary challenges with Naive RAG is its
direct reliance on the user’s original query as the basis for
retrieval. Formulating a precise and clear question is difficult,
and imprudent queries result in subpar retrieval effectiveness.
Sometimes, the question itself is complex, and the language
is not well-organized. Another difficulty lies in language
complexity ambiguity. Language models often struggle when
dealing with specialized vocabulary or ambiguous abbreviations with multiple meanings. For instance, they may not
discern whether “LLM” refers to large language model or a
Master of Laws in a legal context.
1) Query Expansion: Expanding a single query into multiple queries enriches the content of the query, providing
further context to address any lack of specific nuances, thereby
ensuring the optimal relevance of the generated answers.
Multi-Query. By employing prompt engineering to expand
queries via LLMs, these queries can then be executed in
parallel. The expansion of queries is not random, but rather
meticulously designed.
Sub-Query. The process of sub-question planning represents
the generation of the necessary sub-questions to contextualize
and fully answer the original question when combined. This
process of adding relevant context is, in principle, similar
to query expansion. Specifically, a complex question can be
decomposed into a series of simpler sub-questions using the
least-to-most prompting method [92].
Chain-of-Verification(CoVe). The expanded queries undergo
validation by LLM to achieve the effect of reducing hallucinations. Validated expanded queries typically exhibit higher
reliability [93].

[PAGE 9]
2) Query Transformation: The core concept is to retrieve
chunks based on a transformed query instead of the user’s
original query.
Query Rewrite.The original queries are not always optimal
for LLM retrieval, especially in real-world scenarios. Therefore, we can prompt LLM to rewrite the queries. In addition to
using LLM for query rewriting, specialized smaller language
models, such as RRR (Rewrite-retrieve-read) [7]. The implementation of the query rewrite method in the Taobao, known
as BEQUE [9] has notably enhanced recall effectiveness for
long-tail queries, resulting in a rise in GMV .
Another query transformation method is to use prompt
engineering to let LLM generate a query based on the original
query for subsequent retrieval. HyDE [11] construct hypothetical documents (assumed answers to the original query). It
focuses on embedding similarity from answer to answer rather
than seeking embedding similarity for the problem or query.
Using the Step-back Prompting method [10], the original
query is abstracted to generate a high-level concept question
(step-back question). In the RAG system, both the step-back
question and the original query are used for retrieval, and both
the results are utilized as the basis for language model answer
generation.
3) Query Routing: Based on varying queries, routing to
distinct RAG pipeline,which is suitable for a versatile RAG
system designed to accommodate diverse scenarios.
Metadata Router/ Filter . The first step involves extracting
keywords (entity) from the query, followed by filtering based
on the keywords and metadata within the chunks to narrow
down the search scope.
Semantic Router is another method of routing involves
leveraging the semantic information of the query. Specific
apprach see Semantic Router 6. Certainly, a hybrid routing
approach can also be employed, combining both semantic and
metadata-based methods for enhanced query routing.
D. Embedding
In RAG, retrieval is achieved by calculating the similarity
(e.g. cosine similarity) between the embeddings of the question and document chunks, where the semantic representation
capability of embedding models plays a key role. This mainly
includes a sparse encoder (BM25) and a dense retriever (BERT
architecture Pre-training language models). Recent research
has introduced prominent embedding models such as AngIE,
V oyage, BGE,etc [94]–[96], which are benefit from multi-task
instruct tuning. Hugging Face’s MTEB leaderboard7 evaluates
embedding models across 8 tasks, covering 58 datasests. Additionally, C-MTEB focuses on Chinese capability, covering
6 tasks and 35 datasets. There is no one-size-fits-all answer
to “which embedding model to use.” However, some specific
models are better suited for particular use cases.
1) Mix/hybrid Retrieval : Sparse and dense embedding
approaches capture different relevance features and can benefit from each other by leveraging complementary relevance
information. For instance, sparse retrieval models can be used
6https://github.com/aurelio-labs/semantic-router
7https://huggingface.co/spaces/mteb/leaderboard
to provide initial search results for training dense retrieval
models. Additionally, pre-training language models (PLMs)
can be utilized to learn term weights to enhance sparse
retrieval. Specifically, it also demonstrates that sparse retrieval
models can enhance the zero-shot retrieval capability of dense
retrieval models and assist dense retrievers in handling queries
containing rare entities, thereby improving robustness.
2) Fine-tuning Embedding Model: In instances where the
context significantly deviates from pre-training corpus, particularly within highly specialized disciplines such as healthcare,
legal practice, and other sectors replete with proprietary jargon,
fine-tuning the embedding model on your own domain dataset
becomes essential to mitigate such discrepancies.
In addition to supplementing domain knowledge, another
purpose of fine-tuning is to align the retriever and generator,
for example, using the results of LLM as the supervision signal
for fine-tuning, known as LSR (LM-supervised Retriever).
PROMPTAGATOR [21] utilizes the LLM as a few-shot query
generator to create task-specific retrievers, addressing challenges in supervised fine-tuning, particularly in data-scarce
domains. Another approach, LLM-Embedder [97], exploits
LLMs to generate reward signals across multiple downstream
tasks. The retriever is fine-tuned with two types of supervised
signals: hard labels for the dataset and soft rewards from
the LLMs. This dual-signal approach fosters a more effective
fine-tuning process, tailoring the embedding model to diverse
downstream applications. REPLUG [72] utilizes a retriever
and an LLM to calculate the probability distributions of the
retrieved documents and then performs supervised training
by computing the KL divergence. This straightforward and
effective training method enhances the performance of the
retrieval model by using an LM as the supervisory signal,
eliminating the need for specific cross-attention mechanisms.
Moreover, inspired by RLHF (Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback), utilizing LM-based feedback to reinforce
the retriever through reinforcement learning.
E. Adapter
Fine-tuning models may present challenges, such as integrating functionality through an API or addressing constraints arising from limited local computational resources.
Consequently, some approaches opt to incorporate an external
adapter to aid in alignment.
To optimize the multi-task capabilities of LLM, UPRISE [20] trained a lightweight prompt retriever that can
automatically retrieve prompts from a pre-built prompt pool
that are suitable for a given zero-shot task input. AAR
(Augmentation-Adapted Retriver) [47] introduces a universal
adapter designed to accommodate multiple downstream tasks.
While PRCA [69] add a pluggable reward-driven contextual
adapter to enhance performance on specific tasks. BGM [26]
keeps the retriever and LLM fixed,and trains a bridge Seq2Seq
model in between. The bridge model aims to transform the
retrieved information into a format that LLMs can work with
effectively, allowing it to not only rerank but also dynamically select passages for each query, and potentially employ
more advanced strategies like repetition. Furthermore, PKG

[PAGE 10]
introduces an innovative method for integrating knowledge
into white-box models via directive fine-tuning [75]. In this
approach, the retriever module is directly substituted to generate relevant documents according to a query. This method
assists in addressing the difficulties encountered during the
fine-tuning process and enhances model performance.
IV. G ENERATION
After retrieval, it is not a good practice to directly input all
the retrieved information to the LLM for answering questions.
Following will introduce adjustments from two perspectives:
adjusting the retrieved content and adjusting the LLM.
A. Context Curation
Redundant information can interfere with the final generation of LLM, and overly long contexts can also lead LLM
to the “Lost in the middle” problem [98]. Like humans, LLM
tends to only focus on the beginning and end of long texts,
while forgetting the middle portion. Therefore, in the RAG
system, we typically need to further process the retrieved
content.
1) Reranking: Reranking fundamentally reorders document
chunks to highlight the most pertinent results first, effectively
reducing the overall document pool, severing a dual purpose
in information retrieval, acting as both an enhancer and a
filter, delivering refined inputs for more precise language
model processing [70]. Reranking can be performed using
rule-based methods that depend on predefined metrics like
Diversity, Relevance, and MRR, or model-based approaches
like Encoder-Decoder models from the BERT series (e.g.,
SpanBERT), specialized reranking models such as Cohere
rerank or bge-raranker-large, and general large language models like GPT [12], [99].
2) Context Selection/Compression: A common misconception in the RAG process is the belief that retrieving as many
relevant documents as possible and concatenating them to form
a lengthy retrieval prompt is beneficial. However, excessive
context can introduce more noise, diminishing the LLM’s
perception of key information .
(Long) LLMLingua [100], [101] utilize small language
models (SLMs) such as GPT-2 Small or LLaMA-7B, to
detect and remove unimportant tokens, transforming it into
a form that is challenging for humans to comprehend but
well understood by LLMs. This approach presents a direct
and practical method for prompt compression, eliminating the
need for additional training of LLMs while balancing language
integrity and compression ratio. PRCA tackled this issue by
training an information extractor [69]. Similarly, RECOMP
adopts a comparable approach by training an information
condenser using contrastive learning [71]. Each training data
point consists of one positive sample and five negative samples, and the encoder undergoes training using contrastive loss
throughout this process [102] .
In addition to compressing the context, reducing the number of documents aslo helps improve the accuracy of the
model’s answers. Ma et al. [103] propose the “Filter-Reranker”
paradigm, which combines the strengths of LLMs and SLMs.
In this paradigm, SLMs serve as filters, while LLMs function
as reordering agents. The research shows that instructing
LLMs to rearrange challenging samples identified by SLMs
leads to significant improvements in various Information
Extraction (IE) tasks. Another straightforward and effective
approach involves having the LLM evaluate the retrieved
content before generating the final answer. This allows the
LLM to filter out documents with poor relevance through LLM
critique. For instance, in Chatlaw [104], the LLM is prompted
to self-suggestion on the referenced legal provisions to assess
their relevance.
B. LLM Fine-tuning
Targeted fine-tuning based on the scenario and data characteristics on LLMs can yield better results. This is also one
of the greatest advantages of using on-premise LLMs. When
LLMs lack data in a specific domain, additional knowledge can
be provided to the LLM through fine-tuning. Huggingface’s
fine-tuning data can also be used as an initial step.
Another benefit of fine-tuning is the ability to adjust the
model’s input and output. For example, it can enable LLM to
adapt to specific data formats and generate responses in a particular style as instructed [37]. For retrieval tasks that engage
with structured data, the SANTA framework [76] implements
a tripartite training regimen to effectively encapsulate both
structural and semantic nuances. The initial phase focuses on
the retriever, where contrastive learning is harnessed to refine
the query and document embeddings.
Aligning LLM outputs with human or retriever preferences
through reinforcement learning is a potential approach. For
instance, manually annotating the final generated answers
and then providing feedback through reinforcement learning.
In addition to aligning with human preferences, it is also
possible to align with the preferences of fine-tuned models
and retrievers [79]. When circumstances prevent access to
powerful proprietary models or larger parameter open-source
models, a simple and effective method is to distill the more
powerful models(e.g. GPT-4). Fine-tuning of LLM can also
be coordinated with fine-tuning of the retriever to align preferences. A typical approach, such as RA-DIT [27], aligns the
scoring functions between Retriever and Generator using KL
divergence.
V. A UGMENTATION PROCESS IN RAG
In the domain of RAG, the standard practice often involves
a singular (once) retrieval step followed by generation, which
can lead to inefficiencies and sometimes is typically insufficient for complex problems demanding multi-step reasoning,
as it provides a limited scope of information [105]. Many
studies have optimized the retrieval process in response to this
issue, and we have summarised them in Figure 5.
A. Iterative Retrieval
Iterative retrieval is a process where the knowledge base
is repeatedly searched based on the initial query and the text
generated so far, providing a more comprehensive knowledge

[PAGE 11]
Fig. 5. In addition to the most common once retrieval, RAG also includes three types of retrieval augmentation processes. (left) Iterative retrieval involves
alternating between retrieval and generation, allowing for richer and more targeted context from the knowledge base at each step. (Middle) Recursive retrieval
involves gradually refining the user query and breaking down the problem into sub-problems, then continuously solving complex problems through retrieval
and generation. (Right) Adaptive retrieval focuses on enabling the RAG system to autonomously determine whether external knowledge retrieval is necessary
and when to stop retrieval and generation, often utilizing LLM-generated special tokens for control.
base for LLMs. This approach has been shown to enhance
the robustness of subsequent answer generation by offering
additional contextual references through multiple retrieval
iterations. However, it may be affected by semantic discontinuity and the accumulation of irrelevant information. ITERRETGEN [14] employs a synergistic approach that leverages “retrieval-enhanced generation” alongside “generationenhanced retrieval” for tasks that necessitate the reproduction
of specific information. The model harnesses the content
required to address the input task as a contextual basis for
retrieving pertinent knowledge, which in turn facilitates the
generation of improved responses in subsequent iterations.
B. Recursive Retrieval
Recursive retrieval is often used in information retrieval and
NLP to improve the depth and relevance of search results.
The process involves iteratively refining search queries based
on the results obtained from previous searches. Recursive
Retrieval aims to enhance the search experience by gradually converging on the most pertinent information through a
feedback loop. IRCoT [61] uses chain-of-thought to guide
the retrieval process and refines the CoT with the obtained
retrieval results. ToC [57] creates a clarification tree that
systematically optimizes the ambiguous parts in the Query. It
can be particularly useful in complex search scenarios where
the user’s needs are not entirely clear from the outset or where
the information sought is highly specialized or nuanced. The
recursive nature of the process allows for continuous learning
and adaptation to the user’s requirements, often resulting in
improved satisfaction with the search outcomes.
To address specific data scenarios, recursive retrieval and
multi-hop retrieval techniques are utilized together. Recursive
retrieval involves a structured index to process and retrieve
data in a hierarchical manner, which may include summarizing
sections of a document or lengthy PDF before performing a
retrieval based on this summary. Subsequently, a secondary
retrieval within the document refines the search, embodying
the recursive nature of the process. In contrast, multi-hop
retrieval is designed to delve deeper into graph-structured data
sources, extracting interconnected information [106].
C. Adaptive Retrieval
Adaptive retrieval methods, exemplified by Flare [24] and
Self-RAG [25], refine the RAG framework by enabling LLMs
to actively determine the optimal moments and content for
retrieval, thus enhancing the efficiency and relevance of the
information sourced.
These methods are part of a broader trend wherein
LLMs employ active judgment in their operations, as seen
in model agents like AutoGPT, Toolformer, and GraphToolformer [107]–[109]. Graph-Toolformer, for instance, divides its retrieval process into distinct steps where LLMs
proactively use retrievers, apply Self-Ask techniques, and employ few-shot prompts to initiate search queries. This proactive
stance allows LLMs to decide when to search for necessary
information, akin to how an agent utilizes tools.
WebGPT [110] integrates a reinforcement learning framework to train the GPT-3 model in autonomously using a
search engine during text generation. It navigates this process
using special tokens that facilitate actions such as search
engine queries, browsing results, and citing references, thereby
expanding GPT-3’s capabilities through the use of external
search engines. Flare automates timing retrieval by monitoring
the confidence of the generation process, as indicated by the

[PAGE 12]
probability of generated terms [24]. When the probability falls
below a certain threshold would activates the retrieval system
to collect relevant information, thus optimizing the retrieval
cycle. Self-RAG [25] introduces “reflection tokens” that allow
the model to introspect its outputs. These tokens come in
two varieties: “retrieve” and “critic”. The model autonomously
decides when to activate retrieval, or alternatively, a predefined
threshold may trigger the process. During retrieval, the generator conducts a fragment-level beam search across multiple
paragraphs to derive the most coherent sequence. Critic scores
are used to update the subdivision scores, with the flexibility
to adjust these weights during inference, tailoring the model’s
behavior. Self-RAG’s design obviates the need for additional
classifiers or reliance on Natural Language Inference (NLI)
models, thus streamlining the decision-making process for
when to engage retrieval mechanisms and improving the
model’s autonomous judgment capabilities in generating accurate responses.
VI. T ASK AND EVALUATION
The rapid advancement and growing adoption of RAG
in the field of NLP have propelled the evaluation of RAG
models to the forefront of research in the LLMs community.
The primary objective of this evaluation is to comprehend
and optimize the performance of RAG models across diverse
application scenarios.This chapter will mainly introduce the
main downstream tasks of RAG, datasets, and how to evaluate
RAG systems.
A. Downstream Task
The core task of RAG remains Question Answering (QA),
including traditional single-hop/multi-hop QA, multiplechoice, domain-specific QA as well as long-form scenarios
suitable for RAG. In addition to QA, RAG is continuously
being expanded into multiple downstream tasks, such as Information Extraction (IE), dialogue generation, code search, etc.
The main downstream tasks of RAG and their corresponding
datasets are summarized in Table II.
B. Evaluation Target
Historically, RAG models assessments have centered on
their execution in specific downstream tasks. These evaluations
employ established metrics suitable to the tasks at hand. For
instance, question answering evaluations might rely on EM
and F1 scores [7], [45], [59], [72], whereas fact-checking
tasks often hinge on Accuracy as the primary metric [4],
[14], [42]. BLEU and ROUGE metrics are also commonly
used to evaluate answer quality [26], [32], [52], [78]. Tools
like RALLE, designed for the automatic evaluation of RAG
applications, similarly base their assessments on these taskspecific metrics [160]. Despite this, there is a notable paucity
of research dedicated to evaluating the distinct characteristics
of RAG models.The main evaluation objectives include:
Retrieval Quality. Evaluating the retrieval quality is crucial
for determining the effectiveness of the context sourced by
the retriever component. Standard metrics from the domains
of search engines, recommendation systems, and information
retrieval systems are employed to measure the performance of
the RAG retrieval module. Metrics such as Hit Rate, MRR, and
NDCG are commonly utilized for this purpose [161], [162].
Generation Quality . The assessment of generation quality
centers on the generator’s capacity to synthesize coherent and
relevant answers from the retrieved context. This evaluation
can be categorized based on the content’s objectives: unlabeled
and labeled content. For unlabeled content, the evaluation
encompasses the faithfulness, relevance, and non-harmfulness
of the generated answers. In contrast, for labeled content,
the focus is on the accuracy of the information produced by
the model [161]. Additionally, both retrieval and generation
quality assessments can be conducted through manual or
automatic evaluation methods [29], [161], [163].
C. Evaluation Aspects
Contemporary evaluation practices of RAG models emphasize three primary quality scores and four essential abilities,
which collectively inform the evaluation of the two principal
targets of the RAG model: retrieval and generation.
1) Quality Scores: Quality scores include context relevance, answer faithfulness, and answer relevance. These quality scores evaluate the efficiency of the RAG model from
different perspectives in the process of information retrieval
and generation [164]–[166].
Context Relevance evaluates the precision and specificity
of the retrieved context, ensuring relevance and minimizing
processing costs associated with extraneous content.
Answer Faithfulness ensures that the generated answers
remain true to the retrieved context, maintaining consistency
and avoiding contradictions.
Answer Relevance requires that the generated answers are
directly pertinent to the posed questions, effectively addressing
the core inquiry.
2) Required Abilities: RAG evaluation also encompasses
four abilities indicative of its adaptability and efficiency:
noise robustness, negative rejection, information integration,
and counterfactual robustness [167], [168]. These abilities are
critical for the model’s performance under various challenges
and complex scenarios, impacting the quality scores.
Noise Robustness appraises the model’s capability to manage noise documents that are question-related but lack substantive information.
Negative Rejection assesses the model’s discernment in
refraining from responding when the retrieved documents do
not contain the necessary knowledge to answer a question.
Information Integration evaluates the model’s proficiency in
synthesizing information from multiple documents to address
complex questions.
Counterfactual Robustness tests the model’s ability to recognize and disregard known inaccuracies within documents,
even when instructed about potential misinformation.
Context relevance and noise robustness are important for
evaluating the quality of retrieval, while answer faithfulness,
answer relevance, negative rejection, information integration,
and counterfactual robustness are important for evaluating the
quality of generation.

[PAGE 13]
TABLE II
DOWNSTREAM TASKS AND DATASETS OF RAG
Task Sub Task Dataset Method
QA Single-hop Natural Qustion(NQ) [111]
[26], [30], [34], [42], [45], [50], [52], [59], [64], [82]
[3], [4], [22], [27], [40], [43], [54], [62], [71], [112]
[20], [44], [72]
TriviaQA(TQA) [113]
[13], [30], [34], [45], [50], [64]
[4], [27], [59], [62], [112]
[22], [25], [43], [44], [71], [72]
SQuAD [114] [20], [23], [30], [32], [45], [69], [112]
Web Questions(WebQ) [115] [3], [4], [13], [30], [50], [68]
PopQA [116] [7], [25], [67]
MS MARCO [117] [4], [40], [52]
Multi-hop HotpotQA [118] [23], [26], [31], [34], [47], [51], [61], [82]
[7], [14], [22], [27], [59], [62], [69], [71], [91]
2WikiMultiHopQA [119] [14], [24], [48], [59], [61], [91]
MuSiQue [120] [14], [51], [61], [91]
Long-form QA ELI5 [121] [27], [34], [43], [49], [51]
NarrativeQA(NQA) [122] [45], [60], [63], [123]
ASQA [124] [24], [57]
QMSum(QM) [125] [60], [123]
Domain QA Qasper [126] [60], [63]
COVID-QA [127] [35], [46]
CMB [128],MMCU Medical [129] [81]
Multi-Choice QA QuALITY [130] [60], [63]
ARC [131] [25], [67]
CommonsenseQA [132] [58], [66]
Graph QA GraphQA [84] [84]
Dialog Dialog Generation Wizard of Wikipedia (WoW) [133] [13], [27], [34], [42]
Personal Dialog KBP [134] [74], [135]
DuleMon [136] [74]
Task-oriented Dialog CamRest [137] [78], [79]
Recommendation Amazon(Toys,Sport,Beauty) [138] [39], [40]
IE Event Argument Extraction WikiEvent [139] [13], [27], [37], [42]
RAMS [140] [36], [37]
Relation Extraction T-REx [141],ZsRE [142] [27], [51]
Reasoning Commonsense Reasoning HellaSwag [143] [20], [66]
CoT Reasoning CoT Reasoning [144] [27]
Complex Reasoning CSQA [145] [55]
Others Language Understanding MMLU [146] [7], [27], [28], [42], [43], [47], [72]
Language Modeling WikiText-103 [147] [5], [29], [64], [71]
StrategyQA [148] [14], [24], [48], [51], [55], [58]
Fact Checking/Verification FEVER [149] [4], [13], [27], [34], [42], [50]
PubHealth [150] [25], [67]
Text Generation Biography [151] [67]
Text Summarization WikiASP [152] [24]
XSum [153] [17]
Text Classification VioLens [154] [19]
TREC [155] [33]
Sentiment SST-2 [156] [20], [33], [38]
Code Search CodeSearchNet [157] [76]
Robustness Evaluation NoMIRACL [56] [56]
Math GSM8K [158] [73]
Machine Translation JRC-Acquis [159] [17]

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45], | [50], | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | [52], | [59], | Unnamed: 5 | [64], | [82]
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: QA | Unnamed: 1: Single-hop | Unnamed: 2: Natural Qustion(NQ) [111] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [3], [4], [22], [27], [40], [43], | [50],: [54], | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: [62], | [59],: [71], | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]: [112]
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [20], [44], [72] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [13], [30], [34], [45], [50], | [50],: [64] | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: TriviaQA(TQA) [113] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [4], [27], [59], [62], [112] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [22], [25], [43], [44], [71], | [50],: [72] | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: SQuAD [114] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [20], [23], [30], [32], [45], | [50],: [69], | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: [112] | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: Web Questions(WebQ) [115] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [3], [4], [13], [30], [50], [68] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: PopQA [116] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [7], [25], [67] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: MS MARCO [117] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [4], [40], [52] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [23], [26], [31], [34], [47], | [50],: [51], | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: [61], | [59],: [82] | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Multi-hop | Unnamed: 2: HotpotQA [118] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [7], [14], [22], [27], [59], [62], | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: [69], | [52],: | [59],: [71], | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: [91] | [82]:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 2WikiMultiHopQA [119] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [14], [24], [48], [59], [61], | [50],: [91] | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: MuSiQue [120] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [14], [51], [61], [91] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Long-form QA | Unnamed: 2: ELI5 [121] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [27], [34], [43], [49], [51] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: NarrativeQA(NQA) [122] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [45], [60], [63], [123] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: ASQA [124] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [24], [57] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: QMSum(QM) [125] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [60], [123] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Domain QA | Unnamed: 2: Qasper [126] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [60], [63] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: COVID-QA [127] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [35], [46] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: CMB [128],MMCU Medical [129] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [81] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Multi-Choice QA | Unnamed: 2: QuALITY [130] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [60], [63] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: ARC [131] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [25], [67] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: CommonsenseQA [132] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [58], [66] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Graph QA | Unnamed: 2: GraphQA [84] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [84] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: Dialog | Unnamed: 1: Dialog Generation | Unnamed: 2: Wizard of Wikipedia (WoW) [133] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [13], [27], [34], [42] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Personal Dialog | Unnamed: 2: KBP [134] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [74], [135] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: DuleMon [136] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [74] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Task-oriented Dialog | Unnamed: 2: CamRest [137] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [78], [79] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Recommendation | Unnamed: 2: Amazon(Toys,Sport,Beauty) [138] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [39], [40] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: IE | Unnamed: 1: Event Argument Extraction | Unnamed: 2: WikiEvent [139] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [13], [27], [37], [42] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: RAMS [140] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [36], [37] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Relation Extraction | Unnamed: 2: T-REx [141],ZsRE [142] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [27], [51] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: Reasoning | Unnamed: 1: Commonsense Reasoning | Unnamed: 2: HellaSwag [143] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [20], [66] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: CoT Reasoning | Unnamed: 2: CoT Reasoning [144] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [27] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Complex Reasoning | Unnamed: 2: CSQA [145] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [55] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 37: Unnamed: 0: Others | Unnamed: 1: Language Understanding | Unnamed: 2: MMLU [146] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [7], [27], [28], [42], [43], [47], | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: [72] | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Language Modeling | Unnamed: 2: WikiText-103 [147] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [5], [29], [64], [71] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: StrategyQA [148] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [14], [24], [48], [51], [55], | [50],: [58] | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Fact Checking/Verification | Unnamed: 2: FEVER [149] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [4], [13], [27], [34], [42], [50] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 41: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: PubHealth [150] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [25], [67] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 42: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Text Generation | Unnamed: 2: Biography [151] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [67] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 43: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Text Summarization | Unnamed: 2: WikiASP [152] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [24] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 44: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: XSum [153] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [17] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 45: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Text Classification | Unnamed: 2: VioLens [154] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [19] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 46: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: TREC [155] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [33] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 47: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Sentiment | Unnamed: 2: SST-2 [156] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [20], [33], [38] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 48: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Code Search | Unnamed: 2: CodeSearchNet [157] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [76] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 49: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Robustness Evaluation | Unnamed: 2: NoMIRACL [56] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [56] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 50: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Math | Unnamed: 2: GSM8K [158] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [73] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
Row 51: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Machine Translation | Unnamed: 2: JRC-Acquis [159] | [26], [30], [34], [42], [45],: [17] | [50],: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | [52],: | [59],: | Unnamed: 5: | [64],: | [82]:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 14]
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF METRICS APPLICABLE FOR EVALUATION ASPECTS OF RAG
Context
Relevance Faithfulness Answer
Relevance
Noise
Robustness
Negative
Rejection
Information
Integration
Counterfactual
Robustness
Accuracy ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
EM ✓
Recall ✓
Precision ✓ ✓
R-Rate ✓
Cosine Similarity ✓
Hit Rate ✓
MRR ✓
NDCG ✓
BLEU ✓ ✓ ✓
ROUGE/ROUGE-L ✓ ✓ ✓
The specific metrics for each evaluation aspect are summarized in Table III. It is essential to recognize that these
metrics, derived from related work, are traditional measures
and do not yet represent a mature or standardized approach for
quantifying RAG evaluation aspects. Custom metrics tailored
to the nuances of RAG models, though not included here, have
also been developed in some evaluation studies.
D. Evaluation Benchmarks and Tools
A series of benchmark tests and tools have been proposed
to facilitate the evaluation of RAG.These instruments furnish
quantitative metrics that not only gauge RAG model performance but also enhance comprehension of the model’s capabilities across various evaluation aspects. Prominent benchmarks
such as RGB, RECALL and CRUD [167]–[169] focus on
appraising the essential abilities of RAG models. Concurrently, state-of-the-art automated tools like RAGAS [164],
ARES [165], and TruLens 8 employ LLMs to adjudicate the
quality scores. These tools and benchmarks collectively form
a robust framework for the systematic evaluation of RAG
models, as summarized in Table IV.
VII. D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Despite the considerable progress in RAG technology, several challenges persist that warrant in-depth research.This
chapter will mainly introduce the current challenges and future
research directions faced by RAG.
A. RAG vs Long Context
With the deepening of related research, the context of LLMs
is continuously expanding [170]–[172]. Presently, LLMs can
effortlessly manage contexts exceeding 200,000 tokens 9. This
capability signifies that long-document question answering,
previously reliant on RAG, can now incorporate the entire
document directly into the prompt. This has also sparked
discussions on whether RAG is still necessary when LLMs
8https://www.trulens.org/trulens eval/core concepts rag triad/
9https://kimi.moonshot.cn
are not constrained by context. In fact, RAG still plays an
irreplaceable role. On one hand, providing LLMs with a
large amount of context at once will significantly impact its
inference speed, while chunked retrieval and on-demand input
can significantly improve operational efficiency. On the other
hand, RAG-based generation can quickly locate the original
references for LLMs to help users verify the generated answers. The entire retrieval and reasoning process is observable,
while generation solely relying on long context remains a
black box. Conversely, the expansion of context provides new
opportunities for the development of RAG, enabling it to
address more complex problems and integrative or summary
questions that require reading a large amount of material to
answer [49]. Developing new RAG methods in the context of
super-long contexts is one of the future research trends.
B. RAG Robustness
The presence of noise or contradictory information during
retrieval can detrimentally affect RAG’s output quality. This
situation is figuratively referred to as “Misinformation can
be worse than no information at all”. Improving RAG’s
resistance to such adversarial or counterfactual inputs is gaining research momentum and has become a key performance
metric [48], [50], [82]. Cuconasu et al. [54] analyze which
type of documents should be retrieved, evaluate the relevance
of the documents to the prompt, their position, and the
number included in the context. The research findings reveal
that including irrelevant documents can unexpectedly increase
accuracy by over 30%, contradicting the initial assumption
of reduced quality. These results underscore the importance
of developing specialized strategies to integrate retrieval with
language generation models, highlighting the need for further
research and exploration into the robustness of RAG.
C. Hybrid Approaches
Combining RAG with fine-tuning is emerging as a leading
strategy. Determining the optimal integration of RAG and
fine-tuning whether sequential, alternating, or through end-toend joint training—and how to harness both parameterized

[TABLE page=14 index=1]
Columns: The specific metrics | for | each | evaluation | aspect | Unnamed: 0 | are sum- | Unnamed: 1 | are not | constrained by | context. | In | fact, | RAG still | Unnamed: 2 | plays | an
Row 1: The specific metrics: marized in Table III. | for: It is | each: essential | evaluation: | aspect: to recognize | Unnamed: 0: that | are sum-: these | Unnamed: 1: | are not: irreplaceable | constrained by: role. On | context.: one | In: hand, | fact,: providing | RAG still: LLMs | Unnamed: 2: | plays: with | an: a
Row 2: The specific metrics: metrics, derived from | for: related | each: | evaluation: work, | aspect: are traditional | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: measures | Unnamed: 1: | are not: large amount | constrained by: of context | context.: | In: at once will | fact,: | RAG still: significantly | Unnamed: 2: impact | plays: | an: its
Row 3: The specific metrics: and do not yet represent a mature or standardized approach for | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: inference speed, while chunked retrieval and on-demand input | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 4: The specific metrics: quantifying RAG evaluation aspects. Custom metrics | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: tailored | Unnamed: 1: | are not: can significantly improve operational efficiency. On the other | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 5: The specific metrics: to the nuances of RAG models, though not included here, have | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: hand, RAG-based | constrained by: generation | context.: | In: can quickly | fact,: | RAG still: locate the | Unnamed: 2: | plays: original | an:
Row 6: The specific metrics: also been developed in some evaluation studies. | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: references | constrained by: for LLMs to | context.: | In: help users | fact,: verify | RAG still: the generated | Unnamed: 2: | plays: an- | an:
Row 7: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: swers. The entire retrieval and reasoning process is observable, | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 8: The specific metrics: D. Evaluation Benchmarks and Tools | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: while generation | constrained by: solely | context.: | In: relying on | fact,: long | RAG still: context | Unnamed: 2: remains | plays: | an: a
Row 9: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: black box. Conversely, the expansion of context provides new | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 10: The specific metrics: A series of benchmark | for: tests | each: | evaluation: and tools have been proposed | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 11: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: opportunities | constrained by: for the development | context.: | In: | fact,: of | RAG still: RAG, enabling | Unnamed: 2: | plays: it | an: to
Row 12: The specific metrics: to facilitate the evaluation of RAG.These | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: instruments | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: furnish | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 13: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: address | constrained by: more complex | context.: problems | In: and | fact,: | RAG still: integrative or | Unnamed: 2: | plays: summary | an:
Row 14: The specific metrics: quantitative metrics that | for: not | each: only | evaluation: gauge | aspect: RAG model | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: perfor- | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 15: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: questions | constrained by: that require reading | context.: | In: a large | fact,: | RAG still: amount of material | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an: to
Row 16: The specific metrics: mance but also enhance comprehension of the model’s capabil- | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 17: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: answer [49]. Developing new RAG methods in the context of | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 18: The specific metrics: ities across various evaluation aspects. Prominent benchmarks | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 19: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: super-long contexts | constrained by: is one of the future research trends. | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 20: The specific metrics: such as RGB, RECALL | for: and | each: | evaluation: CRUD | aspect: [167]–[169] | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: focus on | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 21: The specific metrics: appraising the essential | for: abilities | each: | evaluation: of | aspect: RAG models. | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: Concur- | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 22: The specific metrics: RAG Robustnessrently, state-of-the-art | for: automated | each: | evaluation: tools | aspect: like RAGAS | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: [164], | Unnamed: 1: | are not: B. | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 23: The specific metrics: ARES [165], and TruLens8 | for: | each: employ | evaluation: | aspect: LLMs to adjudicate | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: the | Unnamed: 1: | are not: The presence | constrained by: of noise | context.: | In: or contradictory | fact,: | RAG still: information | Unnamed: 2: | plays: during | an:
Row 24: The specific metrics: quality scores. These tools and benchmarks collectively form | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: retrieval | constrained by: can detrimentally | context.: | In: affect RAG’s | fact,: | RAG still: output quality. | Unnamed: 2: | plays: This | an:
Row 25: The specific metrics: a robust framework for | for: the | each: | evaluation: systematic | aspect: evaluation | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: of RAG | Unnamed: 1: | are not: situation | constrained by: is figuratively | context.: | In: referred to | fact,: as | RAG still: “Misinformation | Unnamed: 2: | plays: can | an:
Row 26: The specific metrics: models, as summarized in Table IV. | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: be worse | constrained by: than no information | context.: | In: at | fact,: all”. | RAG still: Improving | Unnamed: 2: | plays: RAG’s | an:
Row 27: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: resistance to such adversarial or counterfactual inputs is gain- | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 28: The specific metrics: VII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: ing research | constrained by: momentum | context.: | In: and has become | fact,: | RAG still: a key performance | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 29: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: metric [48], | constrained by: [50], [82]. | context.: | In: Cuconasu et | fact,: | RAG still: al. [54] analyze | Unnamed: 2: | plays: which | an:
Row 30: The specific metrics: Despite the considerable progress in RAG technology, sev- | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 31: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: type of documents should be retrieved, evaluate the relevance | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 32: The specific metrics: eral challenges persist | for: that | each: | evaluation: warrant | aspect: in-depth research.This | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 33: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: of the | constrained by: documents to | context.: the | In: prompt, | fact,: their | RAG still: position, | Unnamed: 2: | plays: and | an: the
Row 34: The specific metrics: chapter will mainly introduce the current challenges and future | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 35: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: number | constrained by: included in the | context.: context. | In: The | fact,: | RAG still: research findings | Unnamed: 2: | plays: reveal | an:
Row 36: The specific metrics: research directions faced by RAG. | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 37: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: that including irrelevant documents can unexpectedly increase | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 38: The specific metrics: | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: accuracy | constrained by: by over 30%, | context.: | In: contradicting | fact,: | RAG still: the initial assumption | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 39: The specific metrics: A. RAG vs Long Context | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: of reduced | constrained by: quality. These | context.: | In: results underscore | fact,: | RAG still: the importance | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 40: The specific metrics: With the deepening of related research, the context of LLMs | for: | each: | evaluation: | aspect: | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: | Unnamed: 1: | are not: of developing specialized strategies to integrate retrieval with | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
Row 41: The specific metrics: is continuously expanding | for: [170]–[172]. | each: | evaluation: | aspect: Presently, LLMs | Unnamed: 0: | are sum-: can | Unnamed: 1: | are not: language generation models, highlighting the need for further | constrained by: | context.: | In: | fact,: | RAG still: | Unnamed: 2: | plays: | an:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=14 index=2]
Columns: Context | Unnamed: 0 | Answer | Noise | Negative | Information | Counterfactual
Row 1: Context: | Unnamed: 0: Faithfulness | Answer: | Noise: | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual:
Row 2: Context: Relevance | Unnamed: 0: | Answer: Relevance | Noise: Robustness | Negative: Rejection | Information: Integration | Counterfactual: Robustness
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=14 index=3]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Context | Unnamed: 1 | Answer | Noise | Negative | Information | Counterfactual
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Context: | Unnamed: 1: Faithfulness | Answer: | Noise: | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Context: Relevance | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: Relevance | Noise: Robustness | Negative: Rejection | Information: Integration | Counterfactual: Robustness
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Accuracy | Context: ✓ | Unnamed: 1: ✓ | Answer: ✓ | Noise: ✓ | Negative: ✓ | Information: ✓ | Counterfactual: ✓
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: EM | Context: | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: | Noise: | Negative: ✓ | Information: | Counterfactual:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Recall | Context: ✓ | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: | Noise: | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: Precision | Context: ✓ | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: | Noise: ✓ | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: R-Rate | Context: | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: | Noise: | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual: ✓
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: Cosine Similarity | Context: | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: ✓ | Noise: | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: Hit Rate | Context: ✓ | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: | Noise: | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: MRR | Context: ✓ | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: | Noise: | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: NDCG | Context: ✓ | Unnamed: 1: | Answer: | Noise: | Negative: | Information: | Counterfactual:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 15]
TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF EVALUATION FRAMEWORKS
Evaluation Framework Evaluation Targets Evaluation Aspects Quantitative Metrics
RGB† Retrieval Quality
Generation Quality
Noise Robustness
Negative Rejection
Information Integration
Counterfactual Robustness
Accuracy
EM
Accuracy
Accuracy
RECALL† Generation Quality Counterfactual Robustness R-Rate (Reappearance Rate)
RAGAS‡ Retrieval Quality
Generation Quality
Context Relevance
Faithfulness
Answer Relevance
*
*
Cosine Similarity
ARES‡ Retrieval Quality
Generation Quality
Context Relevance
Faithfulness
Answer Relevance
Accuracy
Accuracy
Accuracy
TruLens‡ Retrieval Quality
Generation Quality
Context Relevance
Faithfulness
Answer Relevance
*
*
*
CRUD† Retrieval Quality
Generation Quality
Creative Generation
Knowledge-intensive QA
Error Correction
Summarization
BLEU
ROUGE-L
BertScore
RAGQuestEval
† represents a benchmark, and ‡ represents a tool. * denotes customized quantitative metrics, which deviate from traditional
metrics. Readers are encouraged to consult pertinent literature for the specific quantification formulas associated with these
metrics, as required.
and non-parameterized advantages are areas ripe for exploration [27]. Another trend is to introduce SLMs with specific
functionalities into RAG and fine-tuned by the results of RAG
system. For example, CRAG [67] trains a lightweight retrieval
evaluator to assess the overall quality of the retrieved documents for a query and triggers different knowledge retrieval
actions based on confidence levels.
D. Scaling laws of RAG
End-to-end RAG models and pre-trained models based
on RAG are still one of the focuses of current researchers [173].The parameters of these models are one of
the key factors.While scaling laws [174] are established for
LLMs, their applicability to RAG remains uncertain. Initial
studies like RETRO++ [44] have begun to address this, yet the
parameter count in RAG models still lags behind that of LLMs.
The possibility of an Inverse Scaling Law 10, where smaller
models outperform larger ones, is particularly intriguing and
merits further investigation.
E. Production-Ready RAG
RAG’s practicality and alignment with engineering requirements have facilitated its adoption. However, enhancing retrieval efficiency, improving document recall in large knowledge bases, and ensuring data security—such as preventing
10https://github.com/inverse-scaling/prize
inadvertent disclosure of document sources or metadata by
LLMs—are critical engineering challenges that remain to be
addressed [175].
The development of the RAG ecosystem is greatly impacted
by the progression of its technical stack. Key tools like
LangChain and LLamaIndex have quickly gained popularity
with the emergence of ChatGPT, providing extensive RAGrelated APIs and becoming essential in the realm of LLMs.The
emerging technology stack, while not as rich in features as
LangChain and LLamaIndex, stands out through its specialized
products. For example, Flowise AI prioritizes a low-code
approach, allowing users to deploy AI applications, including
RAG, through a user-friendly drag-and-drop interface. Other
technologies like HayStack, Meltano, and Cohere Coral are
also gaining attention for their unique contributions to the field.
In addition to AI-focused vendors, traditional software and
cloud service providers are expanding their offerings to include
RAG-centric services. Weaviate’s Verba 11 is designed for
personal assistant applications, while Amazon’s Kendra 12
offers intelligent enterprise search services, enabling users to
browse various content repositories using built-in connectors.
In the development of RAG technology, there is a clear
trend towards different specialization directions, such as: 1)
Customization - tailoring RAG to meet specific requirements.
2) Simplification - making RAG easier to use to reduce the
11https://github.com/weaviate/Verba
12https://aws.amazon.com/cn/kendra/

[TABLE page=15 index=1]
Columns: Evaluation Framework | Unnamed: 0 | Evaluation Targets | Unnamed: 1 | Evaluation Aspects | Unnamed: 2 | Quantitative Metrics
Row 1: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Noise Robustness | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: Accuracy
Row 2: Evaluation Framework: RGB† | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Retrieval Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Negative Rejection | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: EM
Row 3: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Generation Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Information Integration | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: Accuracy
Row 4: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Counterfactual Robustness | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: Accuracy
Row 5: Evaluation Framework: RECALL† | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Generation Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Counterfactual Robustness | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: R-Rate (Reappearance Rate)
Row 6: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Context Relevance | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: *
Row 7: Evaluation Framework: RAGAS ‡ | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Retrieval Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Faithfulness | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: *
Row 8: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Generation Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics:
Row 9: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Answer Relevance | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: Cosine Similarity
Row 10: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Context Relevance | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: Accuracy
Row 11: Evaluation Framework: ARES ‡ | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Retrieval Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Faithfulness | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: Accuracy
Row 12: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Generation Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics:
Row 13: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Answer Relevance | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: Accuracy
Row 14: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Context Relevance | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: *
Row 15: Evaluation Framework: TruLens ‡ | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Retrieval Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Faithfulness | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: *
Row 16: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Generation Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics:
Row 17: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Answer Relevance | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: *
Row 18: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Creative Generation | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: BLEU
Row 19: Evaluation Framework: CRUD† | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Retrieval Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Knowledge-intensive QA | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: ROUGE-L
Row 20: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: Generation Quality | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Error Correction | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: BertScore
Row 21: Evaluation Framework: | Unnamed: 0: | Evaluation Targets: | Unnamed: 1: | Evaluation Aspects: Summarization | Unnamed: 2: | Quantitative Metrics: RAGQuestEval
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 16]
Fig. 6. Summary of RAG ecosystem
initial learning curve. 3) Specialization - optimizing RAG to
better serve production environments.
The mutual growth of RAG models and their technology
stacks is evident; technological advancements continuously
establish new standards for existing infrastructure. In turn,
enhancements to the technology stack drive the development
of RAG capabilities. RAG toolkits are converging into a
foundational technology stack, laying the groundwork for
advanced enterprise applications. However, a fully integrated,
comprehensive platform concept is still in the future, requiring
further innovation and development.
F . Multi-modal RAG
RAG has transcended its initial text-based questionanswering confines, embracing a diverse array of modal data.
This expansion has spawned innovative multimodal models
that integrate RAG concepts across various domains:
Image. RA-CM3 [176] stands as a pioneering multimodal
model of both retrieving and generating text and images.
BLIP-2 [177] leverages frozen image encoders alongside
LLMs for efficient visual language pre-training, enabling zeroshot image-to-text conversions. The “Visualize Before You
Write” method [178] employs image generation to steer the
LM’s text generation, showing promise in open-ended text
generation tasks.
Audio and Video . The GSS method retrieves and stitches
together audio clips to convert machine-translated data into
speech-translated data [179]. UEOP marks a significant advancement in end-to-end automatic speech recognition by
incorporating external, offline strategies for voice-to-text conversion [180]. Additionally, KNN-based attention fusion leverages audio embeddings and semantically related text embeddings to refine ASR, thereby accelerating domain adaptation.
Vid2Seq augments language models with specialized temporal
markers, facilitating the prediction of event boundaries and
textual descriptions within a unified output sequence [181].
Code. RBPS [182] excels in small-scale learning tasks by
retrieving code examples that align with developers’ objectives
through encoding and frequency analysis. This approach has
demonstrated efficacy in tasks such as test assertion generation and program repair. For structured knowledge, the CoK
method [106] first extracts facts pertinent to the input query
from a knowledge graph, then integrates these facts as hints
within the input, enhancing performance in knowledge graph
question-answering tasks.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
The summary of this paper, as depicted in Figure 6, emphasizes RAG’s significant advancement in enhancing the capabilities of LLMs by integrating parameterized knowledge from
language models with extensive non-parameterized data from
external knowledge bases. The survey showcases the evolution
of RAG technologies and their application on many different
tasks. The analysis outlines three developmental paradigms
within the RAG framework: Naive, Advanced, and Modular RAG, each representing a progressive enhancement over
its predecessors. RAG’s technical integration with other AI
methodologies, such as fine-tuning and reinforcement learning,
has further expanded its capabilities. Despite the progress in
RAG technology, there are research opportunities to improve
its robustness and its ability to handle extended contexts.
RAG’s application scope is expanding into multimodal domains, adapting its principles to interpret and process diverse
data forms like images, videos, and code. This expansion highlights RAG’s significant practical implications for AI deployment, attracting interest from academic and industrial sectors.

[PAGE 17]
The growing ecosystem of RAG is evidenced by the rise in
RAG-centric AI applications and the continuous development
of supportive tools. As RAG’s application landscape broadens,
there is a need to refine evaluation methodologies to keep
pace with its evolution. Ensuring accurate and representative
performance assessments is crucial for fully capturing RAG’s
contributions to the AI research and development community.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Kandpal, H. Deng, A. Roberts, E. Wallace, and C. Raffel, “Large
language models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 15 696–
15 707.
[2] Y . Zhang, Y . Li, L. Cui, D. Cai, L. Liu, T. Fu, X. Huang, E. Zhao,
Y . Zhang, Y . Chenet al., “Siren’s song in the ai ocean: A survey on hallucination in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01219,
2023.
[3] D. Arora, A. Kini, S. R. Chowdhury, N. Natarajan, G. Sinha, and
A. Sharma, “Gar-meets-rag paradigm for zero-shot information retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20158 , 2023.
[4] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V . Karpukhin, N. Goyal,
H. K ¨uttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rockt ¨aschel et al. , “Retrievalaugmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020.
[5] S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, J. Hoffmann, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, K. Millican, G. B. Van Den Driessche, J.-B. Lespiau, B. Damoc, A. Clarket al.,
“Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens,”
in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2022, pp.
2206–2240.
[6] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin,
C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray et al. , “Training language
models to follow instructions with human feedback,” Advances in
neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 27 730–27 744,
2022.
[7] X. Ma, Y . Gong, P. He, H. Zhao, and N. Duan, “Query rewriting for retrieval-augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14283, 2023.
[8] I. ILIN, “Advanced rag techniques: an illustrated overview,” https://pub.towardsai.net/
advanced-rag-techniques-an-illustrated-overview-04d193d8fec6,
2023.
[9] W. Peng, G. Li, Y . Jiang, Z. Wang, D. Ou, X. Zeng, E. Chen et al. ,
“Large language model based long-tail query rewriting in taobao
search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03758 , 2023.
[10] H. S. Zheng, S. Mishra, X. Chen, H.-T. Cheng, E. H. Chi, Q. V . Le,
and D. Zhou, “Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06117 , 2023.
[11] L. Gao, X. Ma, J. Lin, and J. Callan, “Precise zero-shot dense retrieval
without relevance labels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10496 , 2022.
[12] V . Blagojevi, “Enhancing rag pipelines in haystack: Introducing diversityranker and lostinthemiddleranker,” https://towardsdatascience.com/
enhancing-rag-pipelines-in-haystack-45f14e2bc9f5, 2023.
[13] W. Yu, D. Iter, S. Wang, Y . Xu, M. Ju, S. Sanyal, C. Zhu, M. Zeng,
and M. Jiang, “Generate rather than retrieve: Large language models
are strong context generators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10063, 2022.
[14] Z. Shao, Y . Gong, Y . Shen, M. Huang, N. Duan, and W. Chen,
“Enhancing retrieval-augmented large language models with iterative
retrieval-generation synergy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15294 , 2023.
[15] X. Wang, Q. Yang, Y . Qiu, J. Liang, Q. He, Z. Gu, Y . Xiao,
and W. Wang, “Knowledgpt: Enhancing large language models with
retrieval and storage access on knowledge bases,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.11761, 2023.
[16] A. H. Raudaschl, “Forget rag, the future
is rag-fusion,” https://towardsdatascience.com/
forget-rag-the-future-is-rag-fusion-1147298d8ad1, 2023.
[17] X. Cheng, D. Luo, X. Chen, L. Liu, D. Zhao, and R. Yan, “Lift
yourself up: Retrieval-augmented text generation with self memory,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02437 , 2023.
[18] S. Wang, Y . Xu, Y . Fang, Y . Liu, S. Sun, R. Xu, C. Zhu, and
M. Zeng, “Training data is more valuable than you think: A simple
and effective method by retrieving from training data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.08773, 2022.
[19] X. Li, E. Nie, and S. Liang, “From classification to generation:
Insights into crosslingual retrieval augmented icl,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.06595, 2023.
[20] D. Cheng, S. Huang, J. Bi, Y . Zhan, J. Liu, Y . Wang, H. Sun,
F. Wei, D. Deng, and Q. Zhang, “Uprise: Universal prompt retrieval
for improving zero-shot evaluation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08518,
2023.
[21] Z. Dai, V . Y . Zhao, J. Ma, Y . Luan, J. Ni, J. Lu, A. Bakalov, K. Guu,
K. B. Hall, and M.-W. Chang, “Promptagator: Few-shot dense retrieval
from 8 examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11755 , 2022.
[22] Z. Sun, X. Wang, Y . Tay, Y . Yang, and D. Zhou, “Recitation-augmented
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01296 , 2022.
[23] O. Khattab, K. Santhanam, X. L. Li, D. Hall, P. Liang, C. Potts,
and M. Zaharia, “Demonstrate-search-predict: Composing retrieval
and language models for knowledge-intensive nlp,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.14024, 2022.
[24] Z. Jiang, F. F. Xu, L. Gao, Z. Sun, Q. Liu, J. Dwivedi-Yu, Y . Yang,
J. Callan, and G. Neubig, “Active retrieval augmented generation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06983 , 2023.
[25] A. Asai, Z. Wu, Y . Wang, A. Sil, and H. Hajishirzi, “Self-rag:
Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511 , 2023.
[26] Z. Ke, W. Kong, C. Li, M. Zhang, Q. Mei, and M. Bendersky,
“Bridging the preference gap between retrievers and llms,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.06954, 2024.
[27] X. V . Lin, X. Chen, M. Chen, W. Shi, M. Lomeli, R. James, P. Rodriguez, J. Kahn, G. Szilvasy, M. Lewis et al. , “Ra-dit: Retrievalaugmented dual instruction tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01352 ,
2023.
[28] O. Ovadia, M. Brief, M. Mishaeli, and O. Elisha, “Fine-tuning or
retrieval? comparing knowledge injection in llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.05934, 2023.
[29] T. Lan, D. Cai, Y . Wang, H. Huang, and X.-L. Mao, “Copy is all
you need,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2022.
[30] T. Chen, H. Wang, S. Chen, W. Yu, K. Ma, X. Zhao, D. Yu, and
H. Zhang, “Dense x retrieval: What retrieval granularity should we
use?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06648 , 2023.
[31] F. Luo and M. Surdeanu, “Divide & conquer for entailment-aware
multi-hop evidence retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02616 , 2023.
[32] Q. Gou, Z. Xia, B. Yu, H. Yu, F. Huang, Y . Li, and N. Cam-Tu,
“Diversify question generation with retrieval-augmented style transfer,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14503 , 2023.
[33] Z. Guo, S. Cheng, Y . Wang, P. Li, and Y . Liu, “Prompt-guided retrieval augmentation for non-knowledge-intensive tasks,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.17653, 2023.
[34] Z. Wang, J. Araki, Z. Jiang, M. R. Parvez, and G. Neubig, “Learning
to filter context for retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.08377, 2023.
[35] M. Seo, J. Baek, J. Thorne, and S. J. Hwang, “Retrieval-augmented
data augmentation for low-resource domain tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.13482, 2024.
[36] Y . Ma, Y . Cao, Y . Hong, and A. Sun, “Large language model is not
a good few-shot information extractor, but a good reranker for hard
samples!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08559 , 2023.
[37] X. Du and H. Ji, “Retrieval-augmented generative question answering
for event argument extraction,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07067, 2022.
[38] L. Wang, N. Yang, and F. Wei, “Learning to retrieve in-context
examples for large language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07164,
2023.
[39] S. Rajput, N. Mehta, A. Singh, R. H. Keshavan, T. Vu, L. Heldt,
L. Hong, Y . Tay, V . Q. Tran, J. Samostet al., “Recommender systems
with generative retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05065 , 2023.
[40] B. Jin, H. Zeng, G. Wang, X. Chen, T. Wei, R. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Li,
Y . Li, H. Lu et al. , “Language models as semantic indexers,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.07815, 2023.
[41] R. Anantha, T. Bethi, D. V odianik, and S. Chappidi, “Context tuning
for retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05708 ,
2023.
[42] G. Izacard, P. Lewis, M. Lomeli, L. Hosseini, F. Petroni, T. Schick,
J. Dwivedi-Yu, A. Joulin, S. Riedel, and E. Grave, “Few-shot
learning with retrieval augmented language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.03299, 2022.
[43] J. Huang, W. Ping, P. Xu, M. Shoeybi, K. C.-C. Chang, and B. Catanzaro, “Raven: In-context learning with retrieval augmented encoderdecoder language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07922 , 2023.

[TABLE page=17 index=1]
Columns: The growing | ecosystem | of | RAG | is | evidenced | by | the | rise | in | Unnamed: 0 | [19] | X. Li, | E. Nie, | and | S. | Liang, “From | classification | Unnamed: 1 | to generation: | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3
Row 1: The growing: RAG-centric AI applications and the continuous development | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: Insights | E. Nie,: into | and: crosslingual | S.: | Liang, “From: retrieval | classification: augmented | Unnamed: 1: icl,” | to generation:: arXiv | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: preprint
Row 2: The growing: | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv:2311.06595, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 3: The growing: of supportive tools. As RAG’s application landscape broadens, | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 4: The growing: | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [20] | X. Li,: D. Cheng, | E. Nie,: S. | and: Huang, | S.: J. | Liang, “From: Bi, Y. | classification: Zhan, J. | Unnamed: 1: Liu, Y. | to generation:: Wang, | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: H. Sun,
Row 5: The growing: there is a need | ecosystem: to refine | of: evaluation | RAG: | is: | evidenced: methodologies | by: | the: to | rise: keep | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: F. Wei, | E. Nie,: D. Deng, | and: and | S.: Q. | Liang, “From: Zhang, | classification: “Uprise: | Unnamed: 1: Universal | to generation:: prompt | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: retrieval
Row 6: The growing: pace with its | ecosystem: evolution. | of: Ensuring | RAG: | is: accurate | evidenced: and | by: representative | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: for improving zero-shot evaluation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08518, | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 7: The growing: | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 8: The growing: performance assessments is crucial for fully capturing RAG’s | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 9: The growing: | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [21] | X. Li,: Z. Dai, V. Y. Zhao, J. Ma, Y. Luan, J. Ni, J. Lu, A. Bakalov, K. Guu, | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 10: The growing: contributions to the AI research and development community. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: K. B. Hall, and M.-W. Chang, “Promptagator: Few-shot dense retrieval | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 11: The growing: | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: from 8 examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11755, 2022. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 12: The growing: | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [22] | X. Li,: Z. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Tay, Y. Yang, and D. Zhou, “Recitation-augmented | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 13: The growing: | ecosystem: REFERENCES | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01296, 2022. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 14: The growing: | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [23] | X. Li,: O. Khattab, | E. Nie,: K. | and: Santhanam, | S.: | Liang, “From: X. L. | classification: Li, D. | Unnamed: 1: Hall, P. | to generation:: Liang, | Unnamed: 2: C. | Unnamed: 3: Potts,
Row 15: The growing: [1] N. Kandpal, | ecosystem: H. Deng, A. | of: Roberts, | RAG: | is: E. | evidenced: Wallace, and | by: C. Raffel, | the: | rise: “Large | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: and M. | E. Nie,: Zaharia, | and: “Demonstrate-search-predict: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: Composing | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: retrieval
Row 16: The growing: language | ecosystem: models struggle | of: to | RAG: learn | is: long-tail | evidenced: knowledge,” | by: | the: in | rise: Interna- | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: and language | E. Nie,: | and: models | S.: for | Liang, “From: knowledge-intensive | classification: | Unnamed: 1: nlp,” | to generation:: arXiv | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: preprint
Row 17: The growing: tional Conference | ecosystem: on Machine | of: | RAG: Learning. | is: | evidenced: PMLR, | by: 2023, | the: pp. | rise: 15 696– | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv:2212.14024, 2022. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 18: The growing: 15 707. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [24] | X. Li,: Z. Jiang, | E. Nie,: F. F. | and: Xu, L. | S.: Gao, | Liang, “From: Z. Sun, | classification: Q. Liu, | Unnamed: 1: J. Dwivedi-Yu, | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Y. Yang,
Row 19: The growing: [2] Y. Zhang, | ecosystem: Y. Li, L. Cui, | of: D. | RAG: Cai, L. | is: Liu, | evidenced: T. Fu, X. | by: Huang, | the: | rise: E. Zhao, | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: J. Callan, | E. Nie,: and | and: G. Neubig, | S.: | Liang, “From: “Active | classification: retrieval | Unnamed: 1: augmented | to generation:: generation,” | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 20: The growing: Y. Zhang, Y. Chen et al., “Siren’s song in the ai ocean: A survey on hal- | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06983, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 21: The growing: lucination in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01219, | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [25] | X. Li,: A. Asai, | E. Nie,: Z. | and: Wu, Y. | S.: Wang, | Liang, “From: A. | classification: Sil, and | Unnamed: 1: H. Hajishirzi, | to generation:: “Self-rag: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 22: The growing: 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: Learning | E. Nie,: to retrieve, | and: | S.: generate, | Liang, “From: and | classification: critique | Unnamed: 1: through | to generation:: self-reflection,” | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 23: The growing: [3] D. Arora, | ecosystem: A. Kini, S. | of: R. | RAG: Chowdhury, | is: | evidenced: N. Natarajan, | by: G. | the: Sinha, | rise: and | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 24: The growing: A. Sharma, | ecosystem: “Gar-meets-rag | of: | RAG: paradigm | is: | evidenced: for zero-shot | by: information | the: | rise: | in: re- | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [26] | X. Li,: Z. Ke, | E. Nie,: W. Kong, | and: C. | S.: Li, | Liang, “From: M. Zhang, | classification: Q. | Unnamed: 1: Mei, and | to generation:: M. Bendersky, | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 25: The growing: trieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20158, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: “Bridging | E. Nie,: the | and: preference | S.: | Liang, “From: gap between | classification: retrievers | Unnamed: 1: and | to generation:: llms,” | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: arXiv
Row 26: The growing: [4] P. Lewis, | ecosystem: E. Perez, A. | of: Piktus, | RAG: F. | is: Petroni, | evidenced: V. Karpukhin, | by: | the: N. | rise: Goyal, | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: preprint arXiv:2401.06954, 2024. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 27: The growing: H. Küttler, | ecosystem: M. Lewis, | of: W.-t. | RAG: Yih, | is: T. | evidenced: Rocktäschel | by: et al., | the: “Retrieval- | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [27] | X. Li,: X. V. Lin, | E. Nie,: X. | and: Chen, | S.: M. | Liang, “From: Chen, W. | classification: Shi, M. | Unnamed: 1: Lomeli, R. | to generation:: James, | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: P. RoRow 28: The growing: augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” Advances in | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: driguez, | E. Nie,: J. Kahn, | and: G. | S.: Szilvasy, | Liang, “From: M. | classification: Lewis | Unnamed: 1: et al., “Ra-dit: | to generation:: Retrieval- | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 29: The growing: Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: augmented dual | E. Nie,: | and: instruction tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01352, | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 30: The growing: [5] S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, J. Hoffmann, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, K. Milli- | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 31: The growing: can, G. B. Van Den Driessche, J.-B. Lespiau, B. Damoc, A. Clark et al., | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [28] | X. Li,: O. Ovadia, | E. Nie,: M. | and: Brief, | S.: M. | Liang, “From: Mishaeli, | classification: and O. | Unnamed: 1: Elisha, | to generation:: “Fine-tuning | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: or
Row 32: The growing: “Improving | ecosystem: language models | of: | RAG: by retrieving | is: | evidenced: from trillions | by: | the: of | rise: tokens,” | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: retrieval? | E. Nie,: comparing | and: | S.: knowledge | Liang, “From: | classification: injection | Unnamed: 1: in llms,” | to generation:: arXiv | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: preprint
Row 33: The growing: in International | ecosystem: conference | of: | RAG: on machine | is: | evidenced: learning. | by: PMLR, | the: 2022, | rise: | in: pp. | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv:2312.05934, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 34: The growing: 2206–2240. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [29] | X. Li,: T. Lan, | E. Nie,: D. Cai, | and: Y. Wang, | S.: | Liang, “From: H. Huang, | classification: and | Unnamed: 1: X.-L. Mao, | to generation:: “Copy | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: is all
Row 35: The growing: [6] L. Ouyang, | ecosystem: J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: you need,” | E. Nie,: in | and: The Eleventh | S.: | Liang, “From: International | classification: | Unnamed: 1: Conference | to generation:: on | Unnamed: 2: Learning | Unnamed: 3:
Row 36: The growing: C. Zhang, | ecosystem: S. Agarwal, | of: K. | RAG: Slama, | is: A. | evidenced: Ray et al., “Training | by: | the: | rise: language | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: Representations, 2022. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 37: The growing: models to | ecosystem: follow instructions | of: | RAG: with | is: human | evidenced: feedback,” | by: | the: Advances | rise: | in: in | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [30] | X. Li,: T. Chen, | E. Nie,: H. | and: Wang, S. | S.: Chen, | Liang, “From: W. | classification: Yu, K. | Unnamed: 1: Ma, X. Zhao, | to generation:: D. | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Yu, and
Row 38: The growing: neural information | ecosystem: processing | of: | RAG: systems, | is: | evidenced: vol. 35, pp. | by: 27 730–27 744, | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: H. Zhang, | E. Nie,: “Dense | and: x | S.: retrieval: | Liang, “From: What | classification: retrieval | Unnamed: 1: granularity | to generation:: should | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: we
Row 39: The growing: 2022. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: use?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06648, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 40: The growing: [7] X. Ma, Y. | ecosystem: Gong, P. He, | of: | RAG: H. Zhao, | is: | evidenced: and N. Duan, | by: “Query | the: | rise: rewrit- | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [31] | X. Li,: F. Luo | E. Nie,: and M. | and: Surdeanu, | S.: | Liang, “From: “Divide | classification: & conquer | Unnamed: 1: for entailment-aware | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 41: The growing: ing for retrieval-augmented | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: large | is: language | evidenced: models,” | by: arXiv | the: | rise: preprint | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: multi-hop evidence retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02616, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 42: The growing: arXiv:2305.14283, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [32] | X. Li,: Q. Gou, | E. Nie,: Z. Xia, | and: B. | S.: Yu, | Liang, “From: H. Yu, | classification: F. Huang, | Unnamed: 1: Y. Li, and | to generation:: N. | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Cam-Tu,
Row 43: The growing: [8] I. ILIN, | ecosystem: “Advanced | of: | RAG: rag | is: | evidenced: techniques: | by: | the: an | rise: | in: il- | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: “Diversify question generation with retrieval-augmented style transfer,” | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 44: The growing: lustrated | ecosystem: overview,” | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: https://pub.towardsai.net/ | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14503, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 45: The growing: advanced-rag-techniques-an-illustrated-overview-04d193d8fec6, | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [33] | X. Li,: Z. Guo, | E. Nie,: S. Cheng, | and: Y. | S.: Wang, | Liang, “From: P. | classification: Li, and Y. | Unnamed: 1: Liu, “Prompt-guided | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: reRow 46: The growing: 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: trieval augmentation for non-knowledge-intensive tasks,” arXiv preprint | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 47: The growing: [9] W. Peng, | ecosystem: G. Li, Y. Jiang, | of: Z. | RAG: Wang, | is: D. | evidenced: Ou, X. Zeng, | by: E. | the: Chen | rise: et | in: al., | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv:2305.17653, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 48: The growing: “Large language | ecosystem: model | of: based | RAG: long-tail | is: | evidenced: query rewriting | by: | the: in | rise: taobao | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [34] | X. Li,: Z. Wang, J. Araki, Z. Jiang, M. R. Parvez, and G. Neubig, “Learning | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 49: The growing: search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03758, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: to filter | E. Nie,: context | and: for | S.: retrieval-augmented | Liang, “From: | classification: generation,” | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: arXiv | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: preprint
Row 50: The growing: [10] H. S. Zheng, | ecosystem: S. Mishra, | of: X. | RAG: Chen, | is: H.-T. | evidenced: Cheng, E. | by: H. Chi, | the: Q. | rise: V. | in: Le, | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv:2311.08377, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 51: The growing: and D. Zhou, “Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [35] | X. Li,: M. Seo, | E. Nie,: J. Baek, | and: J. Thorne, | S.: | Liang, “From: and | classification: S. J. Hwang, | Unnamed: 1: “Retrieval-augmented | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 52: The growing: large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06117, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: data augmentation | E. Nie,: | and: for | S.: low-resource | Liang, “From: | classification: domain | Unnamed: 1: tasks,” | to generation:: arXiv | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: preprint
Row 53: The growing: [11] L. Gao, X. Ma, J. Lin, and J. Callan, “Precise zero-shot dense retrieval | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv:2402.13482, 2024. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 54: The growing: without relevance labels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10496, 2022. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [36] | X. Li,: Y. Ma, | E. Nie,: Y. Cao, | and: Y. Hong, | S.: | Liang, “From: and A. | classification: Sun, “Large | Unnamed: 1: language | to generation:: model | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: is not
Row 55: The growing: [12] V. Blagojevi, “Enhancing rag pipelines in haystack: Introducing diver- | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: a good | E. Nie,: few-shot | and: information | S.: | Liang, “From: extractor, | classification: but | Unnamed: 1: a good reranker | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: for hard
Row 56: The growing: sityranker | ecosystem: and lostinthemiddleranker,” | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: https://towardsdatascience.com/ | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: samples!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08559, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 57: The growing: enhancing-rag-pipelines-in-haystack-45f14e2bc9f5, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [37] | X. Li,: X. Du and H. Ji, “Retrieval-augmented generative question answering | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 58: The growing: [13] W. Yu, D. | ecosystem: Iter, S. Wang, | of: Y. | RAG: Xu, M. | is: Ju, | evidenced: S. Sanyal, | by: C. Zhu, | the: M. | rise: Zeng, | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: for event argument extraction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07067, 2022. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 59: The growing: and M. Jiang, | ecosystem: “Generate | of: rather | RAG: than | is: retrieve: | evidenced: Large | by: language | the: | rise: models | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [38] | X. Li,: L. Wang, | E. Nie,: N. | and: Yang, | S.: and | Liang, “From: F. Wei, | classification: “Learning | Unnamed: 1: to retrieve | to generation:: in-context | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 60: The growing: are strong context generators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10063, 2022. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: examples for large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07164, | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 61: The growing: [14] Z. Shao, | ecosystem: Y. Gong, Y. | of: Shen, | RAG: M. | is: Huang, | evidenced: N. Duan, | by: and | the: W. | rise: Chen, | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 62: The growing: “Enhancing | ecosystem: retrieval-augmented | of: | RAG: large | is: | evidenced: language models | by: | the: with | rise: iterative | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [39] | X. Li,: S. Rajput, | E. Nie,: N. | and: Mehta, | S.: A. | Liang, “From: Singh, | classification: R. H. Keshavan, | Unnamed: 1: T. | to generation:: Vu, L. | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Heldt,
Row 63: The growing: retrieval-generation synergy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15294, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: L. Hong, Y. Tay, V. Q. Tran, J. Samost et al., “Recommender systems | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 64: The growing: [15] X. Wang, | ecosystem: Q. Yang, Y. | of: Qiu, | RAG: J. | is: Liang, | evidenced: Q. He, | by: Z. Gu, | the: Y. | rise: Xiao, | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: with generative retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05065, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 65: The growing: and W. Wang, | ecosystem: “Knowledgpt: | of: | RAG: Enhancing | is: | evidenced: large language | by: | the: models | rise: with | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [40] | X. Li,: B. Jin, | E. Nie,: H. Zeng, | and: G. Wang, | S.: | Liang, “From: X. Chen, | classification: T. Wei, | Unnamed: 1: R. Li, | to generation:: Z. Wang, | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Z. Li,
Row 66: The growing: retrieval and | ecosystem: storage access | of: | RAG: on knowledge | is: | evidenced: bases,” | by: arXiv | the: | rise: preprint | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: Y. Li, | E. Nie,: H. Lu | and: et al., “Language | S.: | Liang, “From: models | classification: as | Unnamed: 1: semantic | to generation:: indexers,” | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: arXiv
Row 67: The growing: arXiv:2308.11761, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: preprint arXiv:2310.07815, 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 68: The growing: [16] A. H. | ecosystem: Raudaschl, | of: | RAG: “Forget | is: | evidenced: rag, | by: the | the: | rise: future | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [41] | X. Li,: R. Anantha, | E. Nie,: T. | and: Bethi, | S.: D. | Liang, “From: Vodianik, | classification: and S. | Unnamed: 1: Chappidi, | to generation:: “Context | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: tuning
Row 69: The growing: is | ecosystem: rag-fusion,” | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: https://towardsdatascience.com/ | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: for retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05708, | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 70: The growing: forget-rag-the-future-is-rag-fusion-1147298d8ad1, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: 2023. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 71: The growing: [17] X. Cheng, | ecosystem: D. Luo, X. | of: Chen, | RAG: L. | is: Liu, | evidenced: D. Zhao, and | by: R. | the: Yan, | rise: “Lift | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [42] | X. Li,: G. Izacard, | E. Nie,: P. | and: Lewis, | S.: M. | Liang, “From: Lomeli, | classification: L. Hosseini, | Unnamed: 1: F. Petroni, | to generation:: T. | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Schick,
Row 72: The growing: yourself up: | ecosystem: Retrieval-augmented | of: | RAG: text | is: | evidenced: generation with | by: self | the: memory,” | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: J. Dwivedi-Yu, | E. Nie,: | and: A. | S.: Joulin, | Liang, “From: S. | classification: Riedel, and | Unnamed: 1: E. Grave, | to generation:: “Few-shot | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 73: The growing: arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02437, 2023. | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: learning | E. Nie,: with | and: retrieval | S.: augmented | Liang, “From: | classification: language | Unnamed: 1: models,” | to generation:: arXiv | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: preprint
Row 74: The growing: [18] S. Wang, | ecosystem: Y. Xu, Y. Fang, | of: | RAG: Y. Liu, | is: | evidenced: S. Sun, R. | by: Xu, | the: C. Zhu, | rise: and | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: arXiv:2208.03299, 2022. | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 75: The growing: M. Zeng, | ecosystem: “Training data | of: is | RAG: more valuable | is: | evidenced: than you | by: think: | the: A | rise: simple | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: [43] | X. Li,: J. Huang, W. Ping, P. Xu, M. Shoeybi, K. C.-C. Chang, and B. Catan- | E. Nie,: | and: | S.: | Liang, “From: | classification: | Unnamed: 1: | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 76: The growing: and effective method by retrieving from training data,” arXiv preprint | ecosystem: | of: | RAG: | is: | evidenced: | by: | the: | rise: | in: | Unnamed: 0: | [19]: | X. Li,: zaro, “Raven: | E. Nie,: | and: In-context | S.: | Liang, “From: learning | classification: with retrieval | Unnamed: 1: augmented | to generation:: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: encoder-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 18]
[44] B. Wang, W. Ping, P. Xu, L. McAfee, Z. Liu, M. Shoeybi, Y . Dong,
O. Kuchaiev, B. Li, C. Xiao et al. , “Shall we pretrain autoregressive
language models with retrieval? a comprehensive study,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.06762, 2023.
[45] B. Wang, W. Ping, L. McAfee, P. Xu, B. Li, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Instructretro: Instruction tuning post retrieval-augmented pretraining,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07713 , 2023.
[46] S. Siriwardhana, R. Weerasekera, E. Wen, T. Kaluarachchi, R. Rana,
and S. Nanayakkara, “Improving the domain adaptation of retrieval
augmented generation (rag) models for open domain question answering,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
vol. 11, pp. 1–17, 2023.
[47] Z. Yu, C. Xiong, S. Yu, and Z. Liu, “Augmentation-adapted retriever
improves generalization of language models as generic plug-in,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.17331, 2023.
[48] O. Yoran, T. Wolfson, O. Ram, and J. Berant, “Making retrievalaugmented language models robust to irrelevant context,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.01558, 2023.
[49] H.-T. Chen, F. Xu, S. A. Arora, and E. Choi, “Understanding retrieval augmentation for long-form question answering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.12150, 2023.
[50] W. Yu, H. Zhang, X. Pan, K. Ma, H. Wang, and D. Yu, “Chain-of-note:
Enhancing robustness in retrieval-augmented language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.09210, 2023.
[51] S. Xu, L. Pang, H. Shen, X. Cheng, and T.-S. Chua, “Search-in-thechain: Towards accurate, credible and traceable large language models
for knowledgeintensive tasks,” CoRR, vol. abs/2304.14732 , 2023.
[52] M. Berchansky, P. Izsak, A. Caciularu, I. Dagan, and M. Wasserblat,
“Optimizing retrieval-augmented reader models via token elimination,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13682 , 2023.
[53] J. L ´ala, O. O’Donoghue, A. Shtedritski, S. Cox, S. G. Rodriques,
and A. D. White, “Paperqa: Retrieval-augmented generative agent for
scientific research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07559 , 2023.
[54] F. Cuconasu, G. Trappolini, F. Siciliano, S. Filice, C. Campagnano,
Y . Maarek, N. Tonellotto, and F. Silvestri, “The power of noise:
Redefining retrieval for rag systems,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14887,
2024.
[55] Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y . Ren, S. Shi, M. Han, Y . Wu, R. Lai, and
Z. Cao, “Iag: Induction-augmented generation framework for answering reasoning questions,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2023, pp. 1–14.
[56] N. Thakur, L. Bonifacio, X. Zhang, O. Ogundepo, E. Kamalloo,
D. Alfonso-Hermelo, X. Li, Q. Liu, B. Chen, M. Rezagholizadeh et al.,
“Nomiracl: Knowing when you don’t know for robust multilingual
retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11361 ,
2023.
[57] G. Kim, S. Kim, B. Jeon, J. Park, and J. Kang, “Tree of clarifications: Answering ambiguous questions with retrieval-augmented large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14696 , 2023.
[58] Y . Wang, P. Li, M. Sun, and Y . Liu, “Self-knowledge guided
retrieval augmentation for large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.05002, 2023.
[59] Z. Feng, X. Feng, D. Zhao, M. Yang, and B. Qin, “Retrievalgeneration synergy augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.05149, 2023.
[60] P. Xu, W. Ping, X. Wu, L. McAfee, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, S. Subramanian,
E. Bakhturina, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Retrieval meets long
context large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03025 ,
2023.
[61] H. Trivedi, N. Balasubramanian, T. Khot, and A. Sabharwal, “Interleaving retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive
multi-step questions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10509 , 2022.
[62] R. Ren, Y . Wang, Y . Qu, W. X. Zhao, J. Liu, H. Tian, H. Wu, J.R. Wen, and H. Wang, “Investigating the factual knowledge boundary
of large language models with retrieval augmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.11019, 2023.
[63] P. Sarthi, S. Abdullah, A. Tuli, S. Khanna, A. Goldie, and C. D.
Manning, “Raptor: Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized
retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18059 , 2024.
[64] O. Ram, Y . Levine, I. Dalmedigos, D. Muhlgay, A. Shashua, K. LeytonBrown, and Y . Shoham, “In-context retrieval-augmented language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00083 , 2023.
[65] Y . Ren, Y . Cao, P. Guo, F. Fang, W. Ma, and Z. Lin, “Retrieve-andsample: Document-level event argument extraction via hybrid retrieval
augmentation,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
2023, pp. 293–306.
[66] Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji, “Zemi: Learning
zero-shot semi-parametric language models from multiple tasks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.00185, 2022.
[67] S.-Q. Yan, J.-C. Gu, Y . Zhu, and Z.-H. Ling, “Corrective retrieval
augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15884 , 2024.
[68] P. Jain, L. B. Soares, and T. Kwiatkowski, “1-pager: One pass answer
generation and evidence retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16568 ,
2023.
[69] H. Yang, Z. Li, Y . Zhang, J. Wang, N. Cheng, M. Li, and J. Xiao, “Prca:
Fitting black-box large language models for retrieval question answering via pluggable reward-driven contextual adapter,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.18347, 2023.
[70] S. Zhuang, B. Liu, B. Koopman, and G. Zuccon, “Open-source large
language models are strong zero-shot query likelihood models for
document ranking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13243 , 2023.
[71] F. Xu, W. Shi, and E. Choi, “Recomp: Improving retrieval-augmented
lms with compression and selective augmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.04408, 2023.
[72] W. Shi, S. Min, M. Yasunaga, M. Seo, R. James, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and W.-t. Yih, “Replug: Retrieval-augmented black-box language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12652 , 2023.
[73] E. Melz, “Enhancing llm intelligence with arm-rag: Auxiliary rationale memory for retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.04177, 2023.
[74] H. Wang, W. Huang, Y . Deng, R. Wang, Z. Wang, Y . Wang, F. Mi,
J. Z. Pan, and K.-F. Wong, “Unims-rag: A unified multi-source
retrieval-augmented generation for personalized dialogue systems,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13256 , 2024.
[75] Z. Luo, C. Xu, P. Zhao, X. Geng, C. Tao, J. Ma, Q. Lin, and D. Jiang,
“Augmented large language models with parametric knowledge guiding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04757 , 2023.
[76] X. Li, Z. Liu, C. Xiong, S. Yu, Y . Gu, Z. Liu, and G. Yu, “Structureaware language model pretraining improves dense retrieval on structured data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19912 , 2023.
[77] M. Kang, J. M. Kwak, J. Baek, and S. J. Hwang, “Knowledge
graph-augmented language models for knowledge-grounded dialogue
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18846 , 2023.
[78] W. Shen, Y . Gao, C. Huang, F. Wan, X. Quan, and W. Bi, “Retrievalgeneration alignment for end-to-end task-oriented dialogue system,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08877 , 2023.
[79] T. Shi, L. Li, Z. Lin, T. Yang, X. Quan, and Q. Wang, “Dual-feedback
knowledge retrieval for task-oriented dialogue systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.14528, 2023.
[80] P. Ranade and A. Joshi, “Fabula: Intelligence report generation
using retrieval-augmented narrative construction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.13848, 2023.
[81] X. Jiang, R. Zhang, Y . Xu, R. Qiu, Y . Fang, Z. Wang, J. Tang,
H. Ding, X. Chu, J. Zhao et al. , “Think and retrieval: A hypothesis
knowledge graph enhanced medical large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.15883, 2023.
[82] J. Baek, S. Jeong, M. Kang, J. C. Park, and S. J. Hwang,
“Knowledge-augmented language model verification,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.12836, 2023.
[83] L. Luo, Y .-F. Li, G. Haffari, and S. Pan, “Reasoning on graphs: Faithful
and interpretable large language model reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.01061, 2023.
[84] X. He, Y . Tian, Y . Sun, N. V . Chawla, T. Laurent, Y . LeCun,
X. Bresson, and B. Hooi, “G-retriever: Retrieval-augmented generation
for textual graph understanding and question answering,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.07630, 2024.
[85] L. Zha, J. Zhou, L. Li, R. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Yang, J. Yuan, C. Su,
X. Li, A. Su et al., “Tablegpt: Towards unifying tables, nature language
and commands into one gpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08674 , 2023.
[86] M. Gaur, K. Gunaratna, V . Srinivasan, and H. Jin, “Iseeq: Information
seeking question generation using dynamic meta-information retrieval
and knowledge graphs,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 10, 2022, pp. 10 672–10 680.
[87] F. Shi, X. Chen, K. Misra, N. Scales, D. Dohan, E. H. Chi, N. Sch ¨arli,
and D. Zhou, “Large language models can be easily distracted by
irrelevant context,” in International Conference on Machine Learning .
PMLR, 2023, pp. 31 210–31 227.
[88] R. Teja, “Evaluating the ideal chunk size for a rag
system using llamaindex,” https://www.llamaindex.ai/blog/
evaluating-the-ideal-chunk-size-for-a-rag-system-using-llamaindex-6207e5d3fec5,
2023.

[TABLE page=18 index=1]
Columns: [44] B. Wang, W. | Unnamed: 0 | Ping, P. | Xu, | L. | Unnamed: 1 | McAfee, Z. | Liu, | Unnamed: 2 | M. Shoeybi, | Y. | Dong, | Unnamed: 3 | [66] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji, | “Zemi: Learning
Row 1: [44] B. Wang, W.: O. Kuchaiev, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: B. Li, | Xu,: C. | L.: Xiao | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: et al., “Shall | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: we | M. Shoeybi,: pretrain | Y.: autoregressive | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: zero-shot semi-parametric language models from multiple tasks,” arXiv | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 2: [44] B. Wang, W.: language models with retrieval? a comprehensive study,” arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: preprint arXiv:2210.00185, 2022. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 3: [44] B. Wang, W.: arXiv:2304.06762, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [67] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: S.-Q. Yan, J.-C. Gu, Y. Zhu, and Z.-H. Ling, “Corrective | “Zemi: Learning: retrieval
Row 4: [44] B. Wang, W.: [45] B. Wang, W. Ping, L. McAfee, P. Xu, B. Li, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catan- | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15884, 2024. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 5: [44] B. Wang, W.: zaro, “Instructretro: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: Instruction | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: tuning post | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: retrieval-augmented | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: pre- | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [68] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: P. Jain, L. B. Soares, and T. Kwiatkowski, “1-pager: One pass answer | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 6: [44] B. Wang, W.: training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07713, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: generation and evidence retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16568, | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 7: [44] B. Wang, W.: [46] S. Siriwardhana, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: R. | Xu,: Weerasekera, | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: E. Wen, | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: T. Kaluarachchi, | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: R. | Dong,: Rana, | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 8: [44] B. Wang, W.: and S. Nanayakkara, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: “Improving | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: the domain | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: adaptation | Y.: of retrieval | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [69] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: H. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, N. Cheng, M. Li, and J. Xiao, “Prca: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 9: [44] B. Wang, W.: augmented generation (rag) models for open domain question answer- | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: Fitting black-box large language models for retrieval question answer- | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 10: [44] B. Wang, W.: ing,” Transactions | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: of | Xu,: the | L.: Association | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: for | Liu,: Computational | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: Linguistics, | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: ing via pluggable reward-driven contextual adapter,” | “Zemi: Learning: arXiv preprint
Row 11: [44] B. Wang, W.: vol. 11, pp. 1–17, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: arXiv:2310.18347, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 12: [44] B. Wang, W.: [47] Z. Yu, C. Xiong, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: S. | Xu,: Yu, | L.: and | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: Z. Liu, “Augmentation-adapted | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: retriever | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 13: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [70] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: S. Zhuang, B. Liu, B. Koopman, and G. Zuccon, “Open-source | “Zemi: Learning: large
Row 14: [44] B. Wang, W.: improves generalization of language models as generic plug-in,” arXiv | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 15: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: language models are strong zero-shot query likelihood | “Zemi: Learning: models for
Row 16: [44] B. Wang, W.: preprint arXiv:2305.17331, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 17: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: document ranking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13243, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 18: [44] B. Wang, W.: [48] O. Yoran, T. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Wolfson, | Xu,: | L.: O. Ram, | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: and J. | Liu,: Berant, | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: “Making | Y.: retrieval- | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 19: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [71] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: F. Xu, W. Shi, and E. Choi, “Recomp: Improving retrieval-augmented | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 20: [44] B. Wang, W.: augmented language | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: models | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: robust to | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: irrelevant | M. Shoeybi,: context,” | Y.: | Dong,: arXiv | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 21: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: lms with compression and selective augmentation,” | “Zemi: Learning: arXiv preprint
Row 22: [44] B. Wang, W.: preprint arXiv:2310.01558, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 23: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: arXiv:2310.04408, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 24: [44] B. Wang, W.: [49] H.-T. Chen, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: F. Xu, | Xu,: S. | L.: A. Arora, | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: and E. | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: Choi, | M. Shoeybi,: “Understanding | Y.: | Dong,: re- | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 25: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [72] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: W. Shi, S. Min, M. Yasunaga, M. Seo, R. James, M. Lewis, L. Zettle- | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 26: [44] B. Wang, W.: trieval augmentation for long-form question answering,” arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 27: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: moyer, and W.-t. Yih, “Replug: Retrieval-augmented | “Zemi: Learning: black-box lanRow 28: [44] B. Wang, W.: arXiv:2310.12150, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 29: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: guage models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12652, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 30: [44] B. Wang, W.: [50] W. Yu, H. Zhang, X. Pan, K. Ma, H. Wang, and D. Yu, “Chain-of-note: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 31: [44] B. Wang, W.: ra-Enhancing robustness in retrieval-augmented language models,” arXiv | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [73] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: E. Melz, “Enhancing llm intelligence with arm-rag: | “Zemi: Learning: Auxiliary
Row 32: [44] B. Wang, W.: preprintpreprint arXiv:2311.09210, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: tionale memory for retrieval augmented generation,” | “Zemi: Learning: arXiv
Row 33: [44] B. Wang, W.: arXiv:2311.04177, 2023.[51] S. Xu, L. Pang, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: H. | Xu,: Shen, | L.: X. | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: Cheng, and | Liu,: T.-S. | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: Chua, “Search-in-the- | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 34: [44] B. Wang, W.: chain: Towards accurate, credible and traceable large language models | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [74] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: H. Wang, W. Huang, Y. Deng, R. Wang, Z. Wang, | “Zemi: Learning: Y. Wang, F. Mi,
Row 35: [44] B. Wang, W.: for knowledgeintensive tasks,” CoRR, vol. abs/2304.14732, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: J. Z. Pan, and K.-F. Wong, “Unims-rag: A unified | “Zemi: Learning: multi-source
Row 36: [44] B. Wang, W.: [52] M. Berchansky, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: P. Izsak, | Xu,: | L.: A. | Unnamed: 1: Caciularu, | McAfee, Z.: I. | Liu,: Dagan, | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: and M. | Y.: Wasserblat, | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: retrieval-augmented generation for personalized dialogue | “Zemi: Learning: systems,”
Row 37: [44] B. Wang, W.: “Optimizing retrieval-augmented reader models via token elimination,” | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13256, 2024. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 38: [44] B. Wang, W.: arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13682, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [75] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: Z. Luo, C. Xu, P. Zhao, X. Geng, C. Tao, J. Ma, Q. Lin, and D. Jiang, | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 39: [44] B. Wang, W.: [53] J. Lála, O. O’Donoghue, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: A. | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: Shtedritski, | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: S. Cox, | M. Shoeybi,: S. | Y.: G. Rodriques, | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: “Augmented large language models with parametric | “Zemi: Learning: knowledge guidRow 40: [44] B. Wang, W.: and A. D. White, “Paperqa: Retrieval-augmented generative agent | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: for | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: ing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04757, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 41: [44] B. Wang, W.: scientific research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07559, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [76] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: X. Li, Z. Liu, C. Xiong, S. Yu, Y. Gu, Z. Liu, and G. Yu, “Structure- | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 42: [44] B. Wang, W.: [54] F. Cuconasu, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: G. Trappolini, | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: F. Siciliano, | Liu,: S. | Unnamed: 2: Filice, | M. Shoeybi,: C. | Y.: Campagnano, | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: aware language model pretraining improves dense retrieval | “Zemi: Learning: on strucRow 43: [44] B. Wang, W.: Y. Maarek, N. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Tonellotto, | Xu,: | L.: and | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: F. Silvestri, | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: “The | M. Shoeybi,: power | Y.: of | Dong,: noise: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: tured data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19912, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 44: [44] B. Wang, W.: Redefining retrieval for rag systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14887, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [77] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: M. Kang, J. M. Kwak, J. Baek, and S. J. Hwang, | “Zemi: Learning: “Knowledge
Row 45: [44] B. Wang, W.: 2024. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: graph-augmented language models for knowledge-grounded | “Zemi: Learning: dialogue
Row 46: [44] B. Wang, W.: [55] Z. Zhang, X. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Zhang, | Xu,: Y. | L.: Ren, | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: S. Shi, M. | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: Han, | M. Shoeybi,: Y. Wu, | Y.: R. Lai, | Dong,: and | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18846, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 47: [44] B. Wang, W.: Z. Cao, “Iag: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Induction-augmented generation framework for answer- | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [78] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: W. Shen, Y. Gao, C. Huang, F. Wan, X. Quan, and W. Bi, “Retrieval- | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 48: [44] B. Wang, W.: ing reasoning | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: questions,” | Xu,: | L.: in | Unnamed: 1: Proceedings | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: of | Unnamed: 2: the | M. Shoeybi,: 2023 Conference | Y.: | Dong,: on | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: generation alignment for end-to-end task-oriented dialogue | “Zemi: Learning: system,”
Row 49: [44] B. Wang, W.: Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023, pp. 1–14. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08877, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 50: [44] B. Wang, W.: [56] N. Thakur, L. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Bonifacio, | Xu,: | L.: X. | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: Zhang, O. | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: Ogundepo, | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: E. Kamalloo, | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [79] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: T. Shi, L. Li, Z. Lin, T. Yang, X. Quan, and Q. Wang, “Dual-feedback | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 51: [44] B. Wang, W.: D. Alfonso-Hermelo, X. Li, Q. Liu, B. Chen, M. Rezagholizadeh et al., | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: knowledge retrieval for task-oriented dialogue systems,” arXiv preprint | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 52: [44] B. Wang, W.: “Nomiracl: Knowing | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: when | L.: you | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: don’t know | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: for | M. Shoeybi,: robust | Y.: multilingual | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: arXiv:2310.14528, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 53: [44] B. Wang, W.: retrieval-augmented | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: generation,” | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: arXiv preprint | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: arXiv:2312.11361, | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [80] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: P. Ranade and A. Joshi, “Fabula: Intelligence report | “Zemi: Learning: generation
Row 54: [44] B. Wang, W.: 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: using retrieval-augmented narrative construction,” | “Zemi: Learning: arXiv preprint
Row 55: [44] B. Wang, W.: [57] G. Kim, S. Kim, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: B. | Xu,: Jeon, | L.: J. | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: Park, and J. | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: Kang, | M. Shoeybi,: “Tree | Y.: of clarifica- | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: arXiv:2310.13848, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 56: [44] B. Wang, W.: tions: Answering ambiguous questions with retrieval-augmented large | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 57: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [81] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: X. Jiang, R. Zhang, Y. Xu, R. Qiu, Y. Fang, Z. | “Zemi: Learning: Wang, J. Tang,
Row 58: [44] B. Wang, W.: language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14696, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 59: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: H. Ding, X. Chu, J. Zhao et al., “Think and retrieval: | “Zemi: Learning: A hypothesis
Row 60: [44] B. Wang, W.: [58] Y. Wang, P. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Li, M. | Xu,: | L.: Sun, | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: and Y. Liu, | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: “Self-knowledge | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: guided | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 61: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: knowledge graph enhanced medical large language | “Zemi: Learning: models,” arXiv
Row 62: [44] B. Wang, W.: retrieval augmentation | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: for large | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: language | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: models,” | M. Shoeybi,: arXiv | Y.: preprint | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 63: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: preprint arXiv:2312.15883, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 64: [44] B. Wang, W.: arXiv:2310.05002, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 65: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [82] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: J. Baek, S. Jeong, M. Kang, J. C. Park, and | “Zemi: Learning: S. J. Hwang,
Row 66: [44] B. Wang, W.: [59] Z. Feng, X. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Feng, | Xu,: D. | L.: Zhao, | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: M. Yang, | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: and | M. Shoeybi,: B. Qin, | Y.: “Retrieval- | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 67: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: “Knowledge-augmented language model verification,” | “Zemi: Learning: arXiv preprint
Row 68: [44] B. Wang, W.: generation synergy augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 69: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: arXiv:2310.12836, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 70: [44] B. Wang, W.: arXiv:2310.05149, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 71: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [83] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: L. Luo, Y.-F. Li, G. Haffari, and S. Pan, “Reasoning on graphs: Faithful | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 72: [44] B. Wang, W.: [60] P. Xu, W. Ping, X. Wu, L. McAfee, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, S. Subramanian, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 73: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: and interpretable large language model reasoning,” | “Zemi: Learning: arXiv preprint
Row 74: [44] B. Wang, W.: E. Bakhturina, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: M. Shoeybi, | Xu,: | L.: and | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: B. Catanzaro, | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: “Retrieval | Y.: meets | Dong,: long | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 75: [44] B. Wang, W.: | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: arXiv:2310.01061, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 76: [44] B. Wang, W.: context large | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: language | Xu,: | L.: models,” | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: arXiv | Liu,: preprint | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: arXiv:2310.03025, | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 77: [44] B. Wang, W.: LeCun,2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [84] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: X. He, Y. Tian, Y. Sun, N. V. Chawla, T. Laurent, | “Zemi: Learning: Y.
Row 78: [44] B. Wang, W.: X. Bresson, and B. Hooi, “G-retriever: Retrieval-augmented generation[61] H. Trivedi, N. Balasubramanian, T. Khot, and A. Sabharwal, “Interleav- | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 79: [44] B. Wang, W.: for textual graph understanding and question answering,” arXiv preprinting retrieval with | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: chain-of-thought | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: reasoning | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: for | M. Shoeybi,: knowledge-intensive | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 80: [44] B. Wang, W.: arXiv:2402.07630, 2024.multi-step questions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10509, 2022. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 81: [44] B. Wang, W.: [62] R. Ren, Y. Wang, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Y. | Xu,: Qu, | L.: W. | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: X. Zhao, J. | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: Liu, | M. Shoeybi,: H. Tian, | Y.: H. Wu, | Dong,: J.- | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [85] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: L. Zha, J. Zhou, L. Li, R. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Yang, J. Yuan, C. Su, | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 82: [44] B. Wang, W.: R. Wen, and H. Wang, “Investigating the factual knowledge boundary | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: X. Li, A. Su et al., “Tablegpt: Towards unifying tables, nature language | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 83: [44] B. Wang, W.: of large language models with retrieval augmentation,” arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: and commands into one gpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08674, 2023. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 84: [44] B. Wang, W.: arXiv:2307.11019, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [86] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: M. Gaur, K. Gunaratna, V. Srinivasan, and H. Jin, “Iseeq: Information | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 85: [44] B. Wang, W.: [63] P. Sarthi, S. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Abdullah, | Xu,: | L.: A. Tuli, | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: S. Khanna, | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: A. Goldie, | Y.: and | Dong,: C. D. | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: seeking question generation using dynamic meta-information retrieval | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 86: [44] B. Wang, W.: Manning, “Raptor: Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: and knowledge graphs,” in Proceedings of the AAAI | “Zemi: Learning: Conference on
Row 87: [44] B. Wang, W.: retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18059, 2024. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 10, 2022, pp. 10 672–10 680. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 88: [44] B. Wang, W.: [64] O. Ram, Y. Levine, I. Dalmedigos, D. Muhlgay, A. Shashua, K. Leyton- | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [87] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: F. Shi, X. Chen, K. Misra, N. Scales, D. Dohan, E. H. Chi, N. Schärli, | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 89: [44] B. Wang, W.: Brown, and | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Y. Shoham, | Xu,: | L.: “In-context | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: retrieval-augmented | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: language | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: and D. Zhou, “Large language models can be easily | “Zemi: Learning: distracted by
Row 90: [44] B. Wang, W.: models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00083, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: irrelevant context,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 91: [44] B. Wang, W.: [65] Y. Ren, Y. Cao, | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: P. Guo, | Xu,: | L.: F. Fang, | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: W. Ma, | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: and | M. Shoeybi,: Z. Lin, | Y.: “Retrieve-and- | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: PMLR, 2023, pp. 31 210–31 227. | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 92: [44] B. Wang, W.: sample: Document-level event argument extraction via hybrid retrieval | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: | M. Shoeybi,: | Y.: | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: [88] | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: R. Teja, “Evaluating the ideal chunk size | “Zemi: Learning: for a rag
Row 93: [44] B. Wang, W.: augmentation,” | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: in Proceedings | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: of the 61st | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: Annual | M. Shoeybi,: Meeting | Y.: | Dong,: of the | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: system using llamaindex,” https://www.llamaindex.ai/blog/ | “Zemi: Learning:
Row 94: [44] B. Wang, W.: Association for | Unnamed: 0: | Ping, P.: Computational | Xu,: | L.: | Unnamed: 1: | McAfee, Z.: Linguistics | Liu,: | Unnamed: 2: (Volume | M. Shoeybi,: 1: | Y.: Long Papers), | Dong,: | Unnamed: 3: | [66]: | Z. Wang, X. Pan, D. Yu, D. Yu, J. Chen, and H. Ji,: evaluating-the-ideal-chunk-size-for-a-rag-system-using-llamaindex-6207e5d3fec5 | “Zemi: Learning:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 19]
[89] Langchain, “Recursively split by character,” https://python.langchain.
com/docs/modules/data connection/document transformers/recursive
text splitter, 2023.
[90] S. Yang, “Advanced rag 01: Small-tobig retrieval,” https://towardsdatascience.com/
advanced-rag-01-small-to-big-retrieval-172181b396d4, 2023.
[91] Y . Wang, N. Lipka, R. A. Rossi, A. Siu, R. Zhang, and T. Derr,
“Knowledge graph prompting for multi-document question answering,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11730 , 2023.
[92] D. Zhou, N. Sch ¨arli, L. Hou, J. Wei, N. Scales, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, C. Cui, O. Bousquet, Q. Le et al., “Least-to-most prompting
enables complex reasoning in large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.
[93] S. Dhuliawala, M. Komeili, J. Xu, R. Raileanu, X. Li, A. Celikyilmaz,
and J. Weston, “Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11495 , 2023.
[94] X. Li and J. Li, “Angle-optimized text embeddings,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.12871, 2023.
[95] V oyageAI, “V oyage’s embedding models,” https://docs.voyageai.com/
embeddings/, 2023.
[96] BAAI, “Flagembedding,” https://github.com/FlagOpen/
FlagEmbedding, 2023.
[97] P. Zhang, S. Xiao, Z. Liu, Z. Dou, and J.-Y . Nie, “Retrieve anything
to augment large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07554 ,
2023.
[98] N. F. Liu, K. Lin, J. Hewitt, A. Paranjape, M. Bevilacqua, F. Petroni,
and P. Liang, “Lost in the middle: How language models use long
contexts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03172 , 2023.
[99] Y . Gao, T. Sheng, Y . Xiang, Y . Xiong, H. Wang, and J. Zhang, “Chatrec: Towards interactive and explainable llms-augmented recommender
system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14524 , 2023.
[100] N. Anderson, C. Wilson, and S. D. Richardson, “Lingua: Addressing
scenarios for live interpretation and automatic dubbing,” inProceedings
of the 15th Biennial Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas (Volume 2: Users and Providers Track
and Government Track) , J. Campbell, S. Larocca, J. Marciano,
K. Savenkov, and A. Yanishevsky, Eds. Orlando, USA: Association
for Machine Translation in the Americas, Sep. 2022, pp. 202–209.
[Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2022.amta-upg.14
[101] H. Jiang, Q. Wu, X. Luo, D. Li, C.-Y . Lin, Y . Yang, and L. Qiu,
“Longllmlingua: Accelerating and enhancing llms in long context
scenarios via prompt compression,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06839 ,
2023.
[102] V . Karpukhin, B. O ˘guz, S. Min, P. Lewis, L. Wu, S. Edunov, D. Chen,
and W.-t. Yih, “Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question
answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04906 , 2020.
[103] Y . Ma, Y . Cao, Y . Hong, and A. Sun, “Large language model is
not a good few-shot information extractor, but a good reranker for
hard samples!” ArXiv, vol. abs/2303.08559, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532405
[104] J. Cui, Z. Li, Y . Yan, B. Chen, and L. Yuan, “Chatlaw: Open-source
legal large language model with integrated external knowledge bases,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16092 , 2023.
[105] O. Yoran, T. Wolfson, O. Ram, and J. Berant, “Making retrievalaugmented language models robust to irrelevant context,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.01558, 2023.
[106] X. Li, R. Zhao, Y . K. Chia, B. Ding, L. Bing, S. Joty, and S. Poria,
“Chain of knowledge: A framework for grounding large language models with structured knowledge bases,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13269,
2023.
[107] H. Yang, S. Yue, and Y . He, “Auto-gpt for online decision
making: Benchmarks and additional opinions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.02224, 2023.
[108] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dess `ı, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language models
can teach themselves to use tools,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761 ,
2023.
[109] J. Zhang, “Graph-toolformer: To empower llms with graph reasoning ability via prompt augmented by chatgpt,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.11116, 2023.
[110] R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, J. Wu, L. Ouyang, C. Kim,
C. Hesse, S. Jain, V . Kosaraju, W. Saunders et al., “Webgpt: Browserassisted question-answering with human feedback,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
[111] T. Kwiatkowski, J. Palomaki, O. Redfield, M. Collins, A. Parikh,
C. Alberti, D. Epstein, I. Polosukhin, J. Devlin, K. Lee et al., “Natural
questions: a benchmark for question answering research,” Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics , vol. 7, pp. 453–466,
2019.
[112] Y . Liu, S. Yavuz, R. Meng, M. Moorthy, S. Joty, C. Xiong, and Y . Zhou,
“Exploring the integration strategies of retriever and large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12574 , 2023.
[113] M. Joshi, E. Choi, D. S. Weld, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Triviaqa: A large
scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551 , 2017.
[114] P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang, “Squad: 100,000+
questions for machine comprehension of text,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05250, 2016.
[115] J. Berant, A. Chou, R. Frostig, and P. Liang, “Semantic parsing on
freebase from question-answer pairs,” in Proceedings of the 2013
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 2013,
pp. 1533–1544.
[116] A. Mallen, A. Asai, V . Zhong, R. Das, H. Hajishirzi, and D. Khashabi,
“When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness and
limitations of parametric and non-parametric memories,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.10511, 2022.
[117] T. Nguyen, M. Rosenberg, X. Song, J. Gao, S. Tiwary, R. Majumder,
and L. Deng, “Ms marco: A human-generated machine reading comprehension dataset,” 2016.
[118] Z. Yang, P. Qi, S. Zhang, Y . Bengio, W. W. Cohen, R. Salakhutdinov, and C. D. Manning, “Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600,
2018.
[119] X. Ho, A.-K. D. Nguyen, S. Sugawara, and A. Aizawa, “Constructing a
multi-hop qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01060 , 2020.
[120] H. Trivedi, N. Balasubramanian, T. Khot, and A. Sabharwal, “Musique:
Multihop questions via single-hop question composition,” Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics , vol. 10, pp. 539–554,
2022.
[121] A. Fan, Y . Jernite, E. Perez, D. Grangier, J. Weston, and M. Auli, “Eli5:
Long form question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09190 ,
2019.
[122] T. Ko ˇcisk`y, J. Schwarz, P. Blunsom, C. Dyer, K. M. Hermann, G. Melis,
and E. Grefenstette, “The narrativeqa reading comprehension challenge,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
vol. 6, pp. 317–328, 2018.
[123] K.-H. Lee, X. Chen, H. Furuta, J. Canny, and I. Fischer, “A humaninspired reading agent with gist memory of very long contexts,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.09727, 2024.
[124] I. Stelmakh, Y . Luan, B. Dhingra, and M.-W. Chang, “Asqa: Factoid
questions meet long-form answers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06092 ,
2022.
[125] M. Zhong, D. Yin, T. Yu, A. Zaidi, M. Mutuma, R. Jha, A. H.
Awadallah, A. Celikyilmaz, Y . Liu, X. Qiu et al. , “Qmsum: A new
benchmark for query-based multi-domain meeting summarization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05938 , 2021.
[126] P. Dasigi, K. Lo, I. Beltagy, A. Cohan, N. A. Smith, and M. Gardner,
“A dataset of information-seeking questions and answers anchored in
research papers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03011 , 2021.
[127] T. M ¨oller, A. Reina, R. Jayakumar, and M. Pietsch, “Covid-qa: A
question answering dataset for covid-19,” in ACL 2020 Workshop on
Natural Language Processing for COVID-19 (NLP-COVID) , 2020.
[128] X. Wang, G. H. Chen, D. Song, Z. Zhang, Z. Chen, Q. Xiao, F. Jiang,
J. Li, X. Wan, B. Wang et al. , “Cmb: A comprehensive medical
benchmark in chinese,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08833 , 2023.
[129] H. Zeng, “Measuring massive multitask chinese understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.12986, 2023.
[130] R. Y . Pang, A. Parrish, N. Joshi, N. Nangia, J. Phang, A. Chen, V . Padmakumar, J. Ma, J. Thompson, H. He et al. , “Quality: Question answering with long input texts, yes!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08608 ,
2021.
[131] P. Clark, I. Cowhey, O. Etzioni, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, C. Schoenick,
and O. Tafjord, “Think you have solved question answering? try arc,
the ai2 reasoning challenge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457 , 2018.
[132] A. Talmor, J. Herzig, N. Lourie, and J. Berant, “Commonsenseqa:
A question answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00937 , 2018.
[133] E. Dinan, S. Roller, K. Shuster, A. Fan, M. Auli, and J. Weston,
“Wizard of wikipedia: Knowledge-powered conversational agents,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.01241 , 2018.
[134] H. Wang, M. Hu, Y . Deng, R. Wang, F. Mi, W. Wang, Y . Wang, W.C. Kwan, I. King, and K.-F. Wong, “Large language models as source

[TABLE page=19 index=1]
Columns: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split | by | character,” | https://python.langchain. | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,
Row 1: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: com/docs/modules/data connection/document | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: transformers/recursive | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: 2019.
Row 2: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: text splitter, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [112] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: Y. Liu, S. Yavuz, R. Meng, M. Moorthy, S. Joty, C. Xiong, and Y. Zhou,
Row 3: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [90] S. Yang, “Advanced | by: | character,”: rag | https://python.langchain.: 01: Small-to- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: “Exploring the integration strategies of retriever and large language
Row 4: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: big retrieval,” | by: | character,”: https://towardsdatascience.com/ | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12574, 2023.
Row 5: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: advanced-rag-01-small-to-big-retrieval-172181b396d4, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [113] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: M. Joshi, E. Choi, D. S. Weld, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Triviaqa: A large
Row 6: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [91] Y. Wang, N. Lipka, R. A. Rossi, | by: | character,”: A. Siu, | https://python.langchain.: R. Zhang, and T. Derr, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehenRow 7: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: “Knowledge graph prompting for multi-document question answering,” | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: sion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551, 2017.
Row 8: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11730, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [114] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang, “Squad: 100,000+
Row 9: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [92] D. Zhou, N. Schärli, L. Hou, | by: J. Wei, | character,”: N. Scales, | https://python.langchain.: X. Wang, D. Schu- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: questions for machine comprehension of text,” arXiv preprint
Row 10: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: urmans, C. Cui, O. Bousquet, Q. Le et al., | by: | character,”: “Least-to-most prompting | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: arXiv:1606.05250, 2016.
Row 11: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: enables complex reasoning in | by: large | character,”: language | https://python.langchain.: models,” arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [115] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: J. Berant, A. Chou, R. Frostig, and P. Liang, “Semantic parsing on
Row 12: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: arXiv:2205.10625, 2022. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: freebase from question-answer pairs,” in Proceedings of the 2013
Row 13: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [93] S. Dhuliawala, M. Komeili, J. Xu, R. Raileanu, X. Li, A. Celikyilmaz, | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 2013,
Row 14: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: and J. Weston, “Chain-of-verification | by: | character,”: reduces | https://python.langchain.: hallucination in large | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: pp. 1533–1544.
Row 15: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11495, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [116] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: A. Mallen, A. Asai, V. Zhong, R. Das, H. Hajishirzi, and D. Khashabi,
Row 16: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [94] X. Li and J. Li, “Angle-optimized | by: | character,”: text embeddings,” | https://python.langchain.: arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: “When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness and
Row 17: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: arXiv:2309.12871, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: limitations of parametric and non-parametric memories,” arXiv preprint
Row 18: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [95] VoyageAI, “Voyage’s embedding | by: | character,”: models,” https://docs.voyageai.com/ | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: arXiv:2212.10511, 2022.
Row 19: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: embeddings/, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [117] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: T. Nguyen, M. Rosenberg, X. Song, J. Gao, S. Tiwary, R. Majumder,
Row 20: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [96] BAAI, “Flagembedding,” | by: | character,”: https://github.com/FlagOpen/ | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: and L. Deng, “Ms marco: A human-generated machine reading comRow 21: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: FlagEmbedding, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: prehension dataset,” 2016.
Row 22: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [97] P. Zhang, S. Xiao, Z. Liu, Z. | by: Dou, | character,”: and J.-Y. | https://python.langchain.: Nie, “Retrieve anything | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [118] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: Z. Yang, P. Qi, S. Zhang, Y. Bengio, W. W. Cohen, R. SalakhutdiRow 23: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: to augment large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07554, | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: nov, and C. D. Manning, “Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainRow 24: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: able multi-hop question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600,
Row 25: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [98] N. F. Liu, K. Lin, J. Hewitt, A. Paranjape, M. Bevilacqua, F. Petroni, | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: 2018.
Row 26: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: and P. Liang, “Lost in the middle: | by: | character,”: How language | https://python.langchain.: models use long | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [119] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: X. Ho, A.-K. D. Nguyen, S. Sugawara, and A. Aizawa, “Constructing a
Row 27: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: contexts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03172, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: multi-hop qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps,”
Row 28: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [99] Y. Gao, T. Sheng, Y. Xiang, Y. Xiong, H. Wang, and J. Zhang, “Chat- | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01060, 2020.
Row 29: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: rec: Towards interactive and explainable llms-augmented recommender | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 30: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [120] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: H. Trivedi, N. Balasubramanian, T. Khot, and A. Sabharwal, “Musique:
Row 31: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14524, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 32: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: Multihop questions via single-hop question composition,” Transactions
Row 33: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [100] N. Anderson, C. Wilson, and | by: S. D. | character,”: Richardson, | https://python.langchain.: “Lingua: Addressing | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 34: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 10, pp. 539–554,
Row 35: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: scenarios for live interpretation and automatic dubbing,” in Proceedings | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 36: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: 2022.
Row 37: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: of the 15th Biennial Conference | by: | character,”: of the Association | https://python.langchain.: for Machine | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 38: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [121] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: A. Fan, Y. Jernite, E. Perez, D. Grangier, J. Weston, and M. Auli, “Eli5:
Row 39: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: Translation in the Americas (Volume | by: | character,”: 2: Users | https://python.langchain.: and Providers Track | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 40: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: Long form question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09190,
Row 41: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: and Government Track), J. | by: Campbell, | character,”: S. | https://python.langchain.: Larocca, J. Marciano, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 42: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: 2019.
Row 43: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: K. Savenkov, and A. Yanishevsky, | by: | character,”: Eds. Orlando, | https://python.langchain.: USA: Association | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 44: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [122] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: T. Kočiskỳ, J. Schwarz, P. Blunsom, C. Dyer, K. M. Hermann, G. Melis,
Row 45: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: for Machine Translation in the | by: Americas, | character,”: Sep. | https://python.langchain.: 2022, pp. 202–209. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 46: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: and E. Grefenstette, “The narrativeqa reading comprehension chalRow 47: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2022.amta-upg.14 | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 48: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: lenge,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Row 49: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [101] H. Jiang, Q. Wu, X. Luo, D. | by: Li, | character,”: C.-Y. Lin, | https://python.langchain.: Y. Yang, and L. Qiu, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 50: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: vol. 6, pp. 317–328, 2018.
Row 51: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: “Longllmlingua: Accelerating | by: and | character,”: enhancing | https://python.langchain.: llms in long context | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 52: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [123] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: K.-H. Lee, X. Chen, H. Furuta, J. Canny, and I. Fischer, “A humanRow 53: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: scenarios via prompt compression,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06839, | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 54: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: inspired reading agent with gist memory of very long contexts,” arXiv
Row 55: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 56: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: preprint arXiv:2402.09727, 2024.
Row 57: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [102] V. Karpukhin, B. Oğuz, S. Min, P. Lewis, L. Wu, S. Edunov, D. Chen, | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 58: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [124] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: I. Stelmakh, Y. Luan, B. Dhingra, and M.-W. Chang, “Asqa: Factoid
Row 59: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: and W.-t. Yih, “Dense passage | by: | character,”: retrieval for | https://python.langchain.: open-domain question | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 60: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: questions meet long-form answers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06092,
Row 61: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04906, 2020. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 62: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: 2022.
Row 63: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [103] Y. Ma, Y. Cao, Y. Hong, and | by: A. | character,”: Sun, “Large | https://python.langchain.: language model is | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 64: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: H.not a good few-shot information | by: | character,”: extractor, | https://python.langchain.: but a good reranker for | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [125] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: M. Zhong, D. Yin, T. Yu, A. Zaidi, M. Mutuma, R. Jha, A.
Row 65: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: newhard samples!” ArXiv, vol. abs/2303.08559, 2023. [Online]. Available: | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: Awadallah, A. Celikyilmaz, Y. Liu, X. Qiu et al., “Qmsum: A
Row 66: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: summarization,”https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532405 | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: benchmark for query-based multi-domain meeting
Row 67: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05938, 2021.[104] J. Cui, Z. Li, Y. Yan, B. Chen, | by: and | character,”: L. Yuan, | https://python.langchain.: “Chatlaw: Open-source | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,:
Row 68: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: legal large language model with integrated external knowledge bases,” | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [126] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: P. Dasigi, K. Lo, I. Beltagy, A. Cohan, N. A. Smith, and M. Gardner,
Row 69: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: inarXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16092 | by: , 2023. | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: “A dataset of information-seeking questions and answers anchored
Row 70: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [105] O. Yoran, T. Wolfson, O. Ram, | by: | character,”: and J. Berant, | https://python.langchain.: “Making retrieval- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: research papers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03011, 2021.
Row 71: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: augmented language models | by: robust | character,”: to irrelevant | https://python.langchain.: context,” arXiv | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [127] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: T. Möller, A. Reina, R. Jayakumar, and M. Pietsch, “Covid-qa: A
Row 72: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: preprint arXiv:2310.01558, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: question answering dataset for covid-19,” in ACL 2020 Workshop on
Row 73: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [106] X. Li, R. Zhao, Y. K. Chia, B. | by: Ding, | character,”: L. Bing, | https://python.langchain.: S. Joty, and S. Poria, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: Natural Language Processing for COVID-19 (NLP-COVID), 2020.
Row 74: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: “Chain of knowledge: A framework for grounding large language mod- | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [128] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: X. Wang, G. H. Chen, D. Song, Z. Zhang, Z. Chen, Q. Xiao, F. Jiang,
Row 75: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: els with structured knowledge bases,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13269, | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: J. Li, X. Wan, B. Wang et al., “Cmb: A comprehensive medical
Row 76: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: benchmark in chinese,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08833, 2023.
Row 77: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [107] H. Yang, S. Yue, and Y. | by: He, | character,”: “Auto-gpt | https://python.langchain.: for online decision | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [129] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: H. Zeng, “Measuring massive multitask chinese understanding,” arXiv
Row 78: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: making: Benchmarks and | by: additional | character,”: opinions,” | https://python.langchain.: arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: preprint arXiv:2304.12986, 2023.
Row 79: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: arXiv:2306.02224, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [130] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: R. Y. Pang, A. Parrish, N. Joshi, N. Nangia, J. Phang, A. Chen, V. PadRow 80: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [108] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessı̀, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, L. Zettle- | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: makumar, J. Ma, J. Thompson, H. He et al., “Quality: Question anRow 81: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: moyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language models | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: swering with long input texts, yes!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08608,
Row 82: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: can teach themselves to use tools,” | by: | character,”: arXiv preprint | https://python.langchain.: arXiv:2302.04761, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: 2021.
Row 83: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [131] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: P. Clark, I. Cowhey, O. Etzioni, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, C. Schoenick,
Row 84: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [109] J. Zhang, “Graph-toolformer: | by: To | character,”: empower | https://python.langchain.: llms with graph rea- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: and O. Tafjord, “Think you have solved question answering? try arc,
Row 85: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: soning ability via prompt augmented | by: | character,”: by chatgpt,” | https://python.langchain.: arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: the ai2 reasoning challenge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
Row 86: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: arXiv:2304.11116, 2023. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [132] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: A. Talmor, J. Herzig, N. Lourie, and J. Berant, “Commonsenseqa:
Row 87: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [110] R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, | by: | character,”: J. Wu, | https://python.langchain.: L. Ouyang, C. Kim, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: A question answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge,”
Row 88: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: C. Hesse, S. Jain, V. Kosaraju, W. Saunders et al., “Webgpt: Browser- | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00937, 2018.
Row 89: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: assisted question-answering with | by: | character,”: human feedback,” | https://python.langchain.: arXiv preprint | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: [133] | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: E. Dinan, S. Roller, K. Shuster, A. Fan, M. Auli, and J. Weston,
Row 90: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: arXiv:2112.09332, 2021. | by: | character,”: | https://python.langchain.: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: “Wizard of wikipedia: Knowledge-powered conversational agents,”
Row 91: [89] Langchain, “Recursively split: [111] T. Kwiatkowski, J. Palomaki, | by: O. | character,”: Redfield, | https://python.langchain.: M. Collins, A. Parikh, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 7, pp. 453–466,: arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.01241, 2018.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 20]
planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.08840, 2023.
[135] ——, “Large language models as source planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08840,
2023.
[136] X. Xu, Z. Gou, W. Wu, Z.-Y . Niu, H. Wu, H. Wang, and S. Wang,
“Long time no see! open-domain conversation with long-term persona
memory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05797 , 2022.
[137] T.-H. Wen, M. Gasic, N. Mrksic, L. M. Rojas-Barahona, P.-H.
Su, S. Ultes, D. Vandyke, and S. Young, “Conditional generation
and snapshot learning in neural dialogue systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.03352, 2016.
[138] R. He and J. McAuley, “Ups and downs: Modeling the visual evolution
of fashion trends with one-class collaborative filtering,” in proceedings
of the 25th international conference on world wide web , 2016, pp.
507–517.
[139] S. Li, H. Ji, and J. Han, “Document-level event argument extraction
by conditional generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05919 , 2021.
[140] S. Ebner, P. Xia, R. Culkin, K. Rawlins, and B. Van Durme, “Multisentence argument linking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03766 , 2019.
[141] H. Elsahar, P. V ougiouklis, A. Remaci, C. Gravier, J. Hare, F. Laforest,
and E. Simperl, “T-rex: A large scale alignment of natural language
with knowledge base triples,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2018), 2018.
[142] O. Levy, M. Seo, E. Choi, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Zero-shot relation extraction via reading comprehension,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04115,
2017.
[143] R. Zellers, A. Holtzman, Y . Bisk, A. Farhadi, and Y . Choi, “Hellaswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.07830, 2019.
[144] S. Kim, S. J. Joo, D. Kim, J. Jang, S. Ye, J. Shin, and M. Seo,
“The cot collection: Improving zero-shot and few-shot learning of
language models via chain-of-thought fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14045, 2023.
[145] A. Saha, V . Pahuja, M. Khapra, K. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Chandar,
“Complex sequential question answering: Towards learning to converse
over linked question answer pairs with a knowledge graph,” inProceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1,
2018.
[146] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and
J. Steinhardt, “Measuring massive multitask language understanding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300 , 2020.
[147] S. Merity, C. Xiong, J. Bradbury, and R. Socher, “Pointer sentinel
mixture models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843 , 2016.
[148] M. Geva, D. Khashabi, E. Segal, T. Khot, D. Roth, and J. Berant,
“Did aristotle use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with
implicit reasoning strategies,” Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, vol. 9, pp. 346–361, 2021.
[149] J. Thorne, A. Vlachos, C. Christodoulopoulos, and A. Mittal, “Fever: a
large-scale dataset for fact extraction and verification,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.05355, 2018.
[150] N. Kotonya and F. Toni, “Explainable automated fact-checking for
public health claims,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09926 , 2020.
[151] R. Lebret, D. Grangier, and M. Auli, “Neural text generation from
structured data with application to the biography domain,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.07771, 2016.
[152] H. Hayashi, P. Budania, P. Wang, C. Ackerson, R. Neervannan,
and G. Neubig, “Wikiasp: A dataset for multi-domain aspect-based
summarization,” Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, vol. 9, pp. 211–225, 2021.
[153] S. Narayan, S. B. Cohen, and M. Lapata, “Don’t give me the details,
just the summary! topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.08745 , 2018.
[154] S. Saha, J. A. Junaed, M. Saleki, A. S. Sharma, M. R. Rifat, M. Rahouti,
S. I. Ahmed, N. Mohammed, and M. R. Amin, “Vio-lens: A novel
dataset of annotated social network posts leading to different forms
of communal violence and its evaluation,” in Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Bangla Language Processing (BLP-2023), 2023, pp. 72–
84.
[155] X. Li and D. Roth, “Learning question classifiers,” in COLING 2002:
The 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2002.
[156] R. Socher, A. Perelygin, J. Wu, J. Chuang, C. D. Manning, A. Y . Ng,
and C. Potts, “Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality
over a sentiment treebank,” in Proceedings of the 2013 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing , 2013, pp. 1631–
1642.
[157] H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,
“Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code
search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436 , 2019.
[158] K. Cobbe, V . Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser,
M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton, R. Nakano et al., “Training verifiers
to solve math word problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
[159] R. Steinberger, B. Pouliquen, A. Widiger, C. Ignat, T. Erjavec, D. Tufis,
and D. Varga, “The jrc-acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel corpus
with 20+ languages,” arXiv preprint cs/0609058 , 2006.
[160] Y . Hoshi, D. Miyashita, Y . Ng, K. Tatsuno, Y . Morioka, O. Torii,
and J. Deguchi, “Ralle: A framework for developing and evaluating retrieval-augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.10633, 2023.
[161] J. Liu, “Building production-ready rag applications,” https://www.ai.
engineer/summit/schedule/building-production-ready-rag-applications,
2023.
[162] I. Nguyen, “Evaluating rag part i: How to evaluate document retrieval,”
https://www.deepset.ai/blog/rag-evaluation-retrieval, 2023.
[163] Q. Leng, K. Uhlenhuth, and A. Polyzotis, “Best practices for
llm evaluation of rag applications,” https://www.databricks.com/blog/
LLM-auto-eval-best-practices-RAG, 2023.
[164] S. Es, J. James, L. Espinosa-Anke, and S. Schockaert, “Ragas: Automated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.15217, 2023.
[165] J. Saad-Falcon, O. Khattab, C. Potts, and M. Zaharia, “Ares: An
automated evaluation framework for retrieval-augmented generation
systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09476 , 2023.
[166] C. Jarvis and J. Allard, “A survey of techniques for
maximizing llm performance,” https://community.openai.
com/t/openai-dev-day-2023-breakout-sessions/505213#
a-survey-of-techniques-for-maximizing-llm-performance-2, 2023.
[167] J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, and L. Sun, “Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.01431, 2023.
[168] Y . Liu, L. Huang, S. Li, S. Chen, H. Zhou, F. Meng, J. Zhou, and
X. Sun, “Recall: A benchmark for llms robustness against external
counterfactual knowledge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08147 , 2023.
[169] Y . Lyu, Z. Li, S. Niu, F. Xiong, B. Tang, W. Wang, H. Wu, H. Liu,
T. Xu, and E. Chen, “Crud-rag: A comprehensive chinese benchmark
for retrieval-augmented generation of large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.17043, 2024.
[170] P. Xu, W. Ping, X. Wu, L. McAfee, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, S. Subramanian,
E. Bakhturina, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Retrieval meets long
context large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03025 ,
2023.
[171] C. Packer, V . Fang, S. G. Patil, K. Lin, S. Wooders, and J. E. Gonzalez, “Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
[172] G. Xiao, Y . Tian, B. Chen, S. Han, and M. Lewis, “Efficient
streaming language models with attention sinks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.17453, 2023.
[173] T. Zhang, S. G. Patil, N. Jain, S. Shen, M. Zaharia, I. Stoica, and J. E.
Gonzalez, “Raft: Adapting language model to domain specific rag,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10131 , 2024.
[174] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess,
R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei, “Scaling laws
for neural language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020.
[175] U. Alon, F. Xu, J. He, S. Sengupta, D. Roth, and G. Neubig, “Neurosymbolic language modeling with automaton-augmented retrieval,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2022, pp.
468–485.
[176] M. Yasunaga, A. Aghajanyan, W. Shi, R. James, J. Leskovec, P. Liang,
M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and W.-t. Yih, “Retrieval-augmented multimodal language modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12561 , 2022.
[177] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping languageimage pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597 , 2023.
[178] W. Zhu, A. Yan, Y . Lu, W. Xu, X. E. Wang, M. Eckstein, and W. Y .
Wang, “Visualize before you write: Imagination-guided open-ended
text generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03765 , 2022.
[179] J. Zhao, G. Haffar, and E. Shareghi, “Generating synthetic speech from
spokenvocab for speech translation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08174,
2022.
[180] D. M. Chan, S. Ghosh, A. Rastrow, and B. Hoffmeister, “Using external
off-policy speech-to-text mappings in contextual end-to-end automated
speech recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02736 , 2023.

[TABLE page=20 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: arXiv:2310.08840, 2023. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: “Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: [135] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: ——, “Large language models as source planner for personal- | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436, 2019.
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: ized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08840, [158] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser,
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: 2023. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton, R. Nakano et al., “Training verifiers
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: [136] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: X. Xu, Z. Gou, W. Wu, Z.-Y. Niu, H. Wu, H. Wang, and S. Wang, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: to solve math word problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: “Long time no see! open-domain conversation with long-term persona [159] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: R. Steinberger, B. Pouliquen, A. Widiger, C. Ignat, T. Erjavec, D. Tufis,
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: memory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05797, 2022. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: and D. Varga, “The jrc-acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel corpus
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: [137] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: T.-H. Wen, M. Gasic, N. Mrksic, L. M. Rojas-Barahona, P.-H. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: with 20+ languages,” arXiv preprint cs/0609058, 2006.
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: Su, S. Ultes, D. Vandyke, and S. Young, “Conditional generation [160] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: Y. Hoshi, D. Miyashita, Y. Ng, K. Tatsuno, Y. Morioka, O. Torii,
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: and snapshot learning in neural dialogue systems,” arXiv preprint | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: and J. Deguchi, “Ralle: A framework for developing and evalRow 11: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: arXiv:1606.03352, 2016. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: uating retrieval-augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: [138] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: R. He and J. McAuley, “Ups and downs: Modeling the visual evolution | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: arXiv:2308.10633, 2023.
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: of fashion trends with one-class collaborative filtering,” in proceedings [161] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: J. Liu, “Building production-ready rag applications,” https://www.ai.
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: of the 25th international conference on world wide web, 2016, pp. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: engineer/summit/schedule/building-production-ready-rag-applications,
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: 507–517. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: 2023.
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: [139] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: S. Li, H. Ji, and J. Han, “Document-level event argument extraction [162] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: I. Nguyen, “Evaluating rag part i: How to evaluate document retrieval,”
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: by conditional generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05919, 2021. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: https://www.deepset.ai/blog/rag-evaluation-retrieval, 2023.
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: [140] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: S. Ebner, P. Xia, R. Culkin, K. Rawlins, and B. Van Durme, “Multi- [163] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: Q. Leng, K. Uhlenhuth, and A. Polyzotis, “Best practices for
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: sentence argument linking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03766, 2019. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: llm evaluation of rag applications,” https://www.databricks.com/blog/
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: [141] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: H. Elsahar, P. Vougiouklis, A. Remaci, C. Gravier, J. Hare, F. Laforest, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: LLM-auto-eval-best-practices-RAG, 2023.
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: and E. Simperl, “T-rex: A large scale alignment of natural language [164] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: S. Es, J. James, L. Espinosa-Anke, and S. Schockaert, “Ragas: AuRow 22: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: with knowledge base triples,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh Inter- | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: tomated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: national Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: arXiv:2309.15217, 2023.
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: 2018), 2018. [165] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: J. Saad-Falcon, O. Khattab, C. Potts, and M. Zaharia, “Ares: An
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: [142] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: O. Levy, M. Seo, E. Choi, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Zero-shot relation ex- | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: automated evaluation framework for retrieval-augmented generation
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: traction via reading comprehension,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04115, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09476, 2023.
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: 2017. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: [166] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: C. Jarvis and J. Allard, “A survey of techniques for
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: [143] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: R. Zellers, A. Holtzman, Y. Bisk, A. Farhadi, and Y. Choi, “Hel- | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: maximizing llm performance,” https://community.openai.
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: laswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence?” arXiv preprint | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: com/t/openai-dev-day-2023-breakout-sessions/505213#
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: arXiv:1905.07830, 2019. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: a-survey-of-techniques-for-maximizing-llm-performance-2, 2023.
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: [144] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: S. Kim, S. J. Joo, D. Kim, J. Jang, S. Ye, J. Shin, and M. Seo, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: [167] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, and L. Sun, “Benchmarking large lanRow 37: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: “The cot collection: Improving zero-shot and few-shot learning of | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: guage models in retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: language models via chain-of-thought fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: arXiv:2309.01431, 2023.
Row 41: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: arXiv:2305.14045, 2023. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 42: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: [168] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: Y. Liu, L. Huang, S. Li, S. Chen, H. Zhou, F. Meng, J. Zhou, and
Row 43: Unnamed: 0: [145] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: A. Saha, V. Pahuja, M. Khapra, K. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Chandar, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 44: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: X. Sun, “Recall: A benchmark for llms robustness against external
Row 45: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: “Complex sequential question answering: Towards learning to converse | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 46: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: counterfactual knowledge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08147, 2023.
Row 47: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: over linked question answer pairs with a knowledge graph,” in Proceed- | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 48: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: [169] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: Y. Lyu, Z. Li, S. Niu, F. Xiong, B. Tang, W. Wang, H. Wu, H. Liu,
Row 49: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: ings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 32, no. 1, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 50: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: T. Xu, and E. Chen, “Crud-rag: A comprehensive chinese benchmark
Row 51: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: 2018. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 52: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: for retrieval-augmented generation of large language models,” arXiv
Row 53: Unnamed: 0: [146] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 54: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: preprint arXiv:2401.17043, 2024.
Row 55: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: J. Steinhardt, “Measuring massive multitask language understanding,” | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 56: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: [170] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: P. Xu, W. Ping, X. Wu, L. McAfee, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, S. Subramanian,
Row 57: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300, 2020. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 58: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: E. Bakhturina, M. Shoeybi, and B. Catanzaro, “Retrieval meets long
Row 59: Unnamed: 0: [147] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: S. Merity, C. Xiong, J. Bradbury, and R. Socher, “Pointer sentinel | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 60: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: context large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03025,
Row 61: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: mixture models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843, 2016. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 62: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: 2023.
Row 63: Unnamed: 0: [148] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: M. Geva, D. Khashabi, E. Segal, T. Khot, D. Roth, and J. Berant, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 64: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: Gon-“Did aristotle use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with[171] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: C. Packer, V. Fang, S. G. Patil, K. Lin, S. Wooders, and J. E.
Row 65: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: preprintimplicit reasoning strategies,” Transactions of the Association for | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: zalez, “Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems,” arXiv
Row 66: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
Row 67: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: Computational Linguistics, vol. 9, pp. 346–361, 2021. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 68: Unnamed: 0: [149] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: J. Thorne, A. Vlachos, C. Christodoulopoulos, and A. Mittal, “Fever: a [172] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: G. Xiao, Y. Tian, B. Chen, S. Han, and M. Lewis, “Efficient
Row 69: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: large-scale dataset for fact extraction and verification,” preprintarXiv preprint | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: streaming language models with attention sinks,” arXiv
Row 70: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: arXiv:2309.17453, 2023.arXiv:1803.05355, 2018. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,:
Row 71: Unnamed: 0: [150] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: N. Kotonya and F. Toni, “Explainable automated fact-checking for [173] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: T. Zhang, S. G. Patil, N. Jain, S. Shen, M. Zaharia, I. Stoica, and J. E.
Row 72: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: public health claims,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09926, 2020. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: Gonzalez, “Raft: Adapting language model to domain specific rag,”
Row 73: Unnamed: 0: [151] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: R. Lebret, D. Grangier, and M. Auli, “Neural text generation from | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10131, 2024.
Row 74: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: structured data with application to the biography domain,” arXiv [174] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess,
Row 75: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: preprint arXiv:1603.07771, 2016. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei, “Scaling laws
Row 76: Unnamed: 0: [152] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: H. Hayashi, P. Budania, P. Wang, C. Ackerson, R. Neervannan, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: for neural language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Row 77: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: and G. Neubig, “Wikiasp: A dataset for multi-domain aspect-based [175] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: U. Alon, F. Xu, J. He, S. Sengupta, D. Roth, and G. Neubig, “NeuroRow 78: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: summarization,” Transactions of the Association for Computational | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: symbolic language modeling with automaton-augmented retrieval,” in
Row 79: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: Linguistics, vol. 9, pp. 211–225, 2021. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp.
Row 80: Unnamed: 0: [153] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: S. Narayan, S. B. Cohen, and M. Lapata, “Don’t give me the details, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: 468–485.
Row 81: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: just the summary! topic-aware convolutional neural networks for ex- [176] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: M. Yasunaga, A. Aghajanyan, W. Shi, R. James, J. Leskovec, P. Liang,
Row 82: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: treme summarization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.08745, 2018. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and W.-t. Yih, “Retrieval-augmented multiRow 83: Unnamed: 0: [154] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: S. Saha, J. A. Junaed, M. Saleki, A. S. Sharma, M. R. Rifat, M. Rahouti, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: modal language modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12561, 2022.
Row 84: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: S. I. Ahmed, N. Mohammed, and M. R. Amin, “Vio-lens: A novel [177] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping languageRow 85: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: dataset of annotated social network posts leading to different forms | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language
Row 86: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: of communal violence and its evaluation,” in Proceedings of the First | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597, 2023.
Row 87: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: Workshop on Bangla Language Processing (BLP-2023), 2023, pp. 72– [178] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: W. Zhu, A. Yan, Y. Lu, W. Xu, X. E. Wang, M. Eckstein, and W. Y.
Row 88: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: 84. | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: Wang, “Visualize before you write: Imagination-guided open-ended
Row 89: Unnamed: 0: [155] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: X. Li and D. Roth, “Learning question classifiers,” in COLING 2002: | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: text generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03765, 2022.
Row 90: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: The 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2002. [179] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: J. Zhao, G. Haffar, and E. Shareghi, “Generating synthetic speech from
Row 91: Unnamed: 0: [156] | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: R. Socher, A. Perelygin, J. Wu, J. Chuang, C. D. Manning, A. Y. Ng, | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: spokenvocab for speech translation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08174,
Row 92: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: and C. Potts, “Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: 2022.
Row 93: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: over a sentiment treebank,” in Proceedings of the 2013 conference on [180] | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: D. M. Chan, S. Ghosh, A. Rastrow, and B. Hoffmeister, “Using external
Row 94: Unnamed: 0: | planner for personalized knowledge-grounded dialogue,” arXiv preprint [157]: empirical methods in natural language processing, 2013, pp. 1631– | H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,: off-policy speech-to-text mappings in contextual end-to-end automated
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 21]
[181] A. Yang, A. Nagrani, P. H. Seo, A. Miech, J. Pont-Tuset, I. Laptev,
J. Sivic, and C. Schmid, “Vid2seq: Large-scale pretraining of a visual
language model for dense video captioning,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
2023, pp. 10 714–10 726.
[182] N. Nashid, M. Sintaha, and A. Mesbah, “Retrieval-based prompt
selection for code-related few-shot learning,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2023, pp.
2450–2462.