[PAGE 1]
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Pattern Recognition
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pr
Enhancing textual textbook question answering with large language models
and retrieval augmented generation
Hessa A. Alawwad a,b,∗, Areej Alhothali a, Usman Naseem c
, Ali Alkhathlan a, Amani Jamal a
a Faculty of Computing and Information Technology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
b College of Computer and Information Science, Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University (IMSIU), Saudi Arabia
c School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Natural language processing
Textbook question answering
Retrieval augmented generation
Large language models
Llama-2
A B S T R A C T
Textbook question answering (TQA) is a challenging task in artificial intelligence due to the complex nature of
context needed to answer complex questions. Although previous research has improved the task, there are still
some limitations in textual TQA, including weak reasoning and inability to capture contextual information in
the lengthy context. We propose a framework (PLRTQA) that incorporates the retrieval augmented generation
(RAG) technique to handle the ‘‘out- of-domain’’ scenario where concepts are spread across different lessons,
and utilize transfer learning to handle the long context and enhance reasoning abilities. Our architecture
outperforms the baseline, achieving an accuracy improvement of 4. 12% in the validation set and 9. 84% in
the test set for textual multiple-choice questions. While this paper focuses on solving challenges in the textual
TQA, It provides a foundation for future work in multimodal TQA where the visual components are integrated
to address more complex educational scenarios. Code: https://github.com/hessaAlawwad/PLR-TQA
1. Introduction
Natural language processing (NLP) is one of the most complex applications of artificial intelligence (AI). Using deep learning algorithms to
enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or
generate natural language has contributed to the latest advancements in
the NLP field [1]. Question answering (QA) is particularly captivating
and expansive among the many tasks in NLP. As a part of AI and
NLP, QA employs NLP techniques to respond to queries [2]. This task
requires a deep understanding of language to provide accurate answers
to questions posed in natural language by humans.
Research in QA has shown significant activity, classifying QA systems into three categories based on input modality or knowledge
source [3]: Context QA, visual QA (VQA), and textbook QA (TQA).
Context QA, also known as machine reading comprehension (MRC) [1],
involves a model answering a natural language question by understanding textual context. VQA integrates NLP and computer vision (CV),
requiring a model to deduce answers from images. TQA requires a
model to answer multimodal questions by comprehending multimodal
contexts [3,4].
In 2017, Kembavi and other researchers [4] proposed a dataset to
introduce challenges unique to TQA, which are absent in MRC and
∗ Corresponding author at: College of Computer and Information Science, Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University (IMSIU), Saudi Arabia.
E-mail addresses: alawwad.a.hessa@gmail.com (H.A. Alawwad), aalhothali@kau.edu.sa (A. Alhothali), usman.naseem@mq.edu.au (U. Naseem),
Analkhathlan@kau.edu.sa (A. Alkhathlan), atjamal@kau.edu.sa (A. Jamal).
VQA. TQA involves complex reasoning and understanding of multimodal contexts, which include scientific diagrams and extensive information, in order to answer questions.
TQA is a complex task that aims to answer questions by comprehending the middle school science education materials that encompass
visual and textual content in order to answer diverse types of questions.
The complexity of the task comes from the challenges it brought and
the required reasoning ability over the integrated information from
different modalities, which require both visual comprehension and
language understanding.
Considered an AI grand challenge [5], TQA represents a multimodal
machine reading comprehension (M3C) task where both modalities
have their own challenges and difficulties, demanding substantial research efforts. For the textual part of TQA which is our main focus in
this paper, the longer average length of context, where the answer must
be inferred from, has an average length of 1800 words [6].
Effectively handling dependencies within such lengthy textual contexts is a crucial challenge. The extensive nature of the context, with
more than 50 sentences in over 75% of the lessons [4], combined
with the limited training data (15,153 samples), adds complexity to
representing the diversity and intricacy found in real-world data, which
hinders a model’s ability to effectively generalize. Another challenge
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2024.111332
Received 13 February 2024; Received in revised form 15 December 2024; Accepted 26 December 2024
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332
Available online 16 January 2025
0031-3203/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass
Row 1: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: generate natural language has contributed to the latest advancements in | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: visual and textual content in order to answer diverse types of questions.
Row 2: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: the NLP field [1]. Question answering (QA) is particularly captivating | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: The complexity of the task comes from the challenges it brought and
Row 3: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: and expansive among the many tasks in NLP. As a part of AI and | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: the required reasoning ability over the integrated information from
Row 4: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: NLP, QA employs NLP techniques to respond to queries [2]. This task | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: different modalities, which require both visual comprehension and
Row 5: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: requires a deep understanding of language to provide accurate answers | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: language understanding.
Row 6: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: to questions posed in natural language by humans. | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: Considered an AI grand challenge [5], TQA represents a multimodal
Row 7: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: Research in QA has shown significant activity, classifying QA sys- | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: machine reading comprehension (M3C) task where both modalities
Row 8: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: tems into three categories based on input modality or knowledge | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: have their own challenges and difficulties, demanding substantial reRow 9: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: source [3]: Context QA, visual QA (VQA), and textbook QA (TQA). | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: search efforts. For the textual part of TQA which is our main focus in
Row 10: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: Context QA, also known as machine reading comprehension (MRC) [1], | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: this paper, the longer average length of context, where the answer must
Row 11: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: involves a model answering a natural language question by understand- | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: be inferred from, has an average length of 1800 words [6].
Row 12: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: ing textual context. VQA integrates NLP and computer vision (CV), | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: Effectively handling dependencies within such lengthy textual conRow 13: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: requiring a model to deduce answers from images. TQA requires a | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: texts is a crucial challenge. The extensive nature of the context, with
Row 14: enhance a computer’s ability to either understand natural language or: model to answer multimodal questions by comprehending multimodal | hending the middle school science education materials that encompass: more than 50 sentences in over 75% of the lessons [4], combined
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
Fig. 1. Examples from the textbook question answering dataset [4]. The question on the left requires inferring the answer from two sentences. On the right, images present
analogies in the textbook question answering dataset, where the question aims to clarify the notion of gravity by establishing a comparison that highlights similarities between
two distinct physical scenarios, making the complex concept more comprehensible.
is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA,
which is referred to as ‘‘out-of-domain’’ problem. The out-of-domain
problem brings the need for some techniques that retrieve the relevant
context from all the available lessons and not only the lesson where the
question in.
The TQA dataset (CK12-QA) demonstrates a high level of understanding, as shown in Fig. 1. The question on the left requires extracting
an answer from multiple sentences. In contrast, the question on the
right aims to compare two scenarios to explain a complex concept in a
simpler or more relatable way. It also requires the ability to handle
qualitative and quantitative data, along with a deep understanding
of language nuances related to negation, conjunction, or common
sense [7].
Recent works on TQA used advanced deep learning techniques
but still lacks the ability to resolve some of the existing challenges,
more specifically the challenge of capturing the textual information
on the context and the ability to adequately reason over such lengthy
lessons. The TQA task is vital due to its real-life modality, reflecting the
complexities of questions and contexts found in textbooks, emphasizing
its importance as a knowledge source and the achieved accuracy needs
to be improved.
These challenges must be addressed and resolved by incorporating
the latest advancements in both MRC and CV. Recent advancements in
Large Language Models (LLM) such as, GPT [8] and Llama-2 [9], have
demonstrated an improved understanding and comprehending of text
and question answering [10]. When information is provided within the
LLM context window, these models excel at generating responses that
are cohere and contextually relevant. However, LLMs have significant
difficulties when used for TQA, especially when dealing with longcontext inquiries and out-of-domain scenarios. LLMs can be misleading
in these cases where the actual relevant information might be scattered
across the different lessons or even missing causing inaccurate answers.
We suggest a novel framework that combines the Llama-2 large language model with retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to address
these issues.
Llama-2, an LLM, has achieved the highest performance among
open-source LLMs, surpassing models like Falcon [11] on standard academic benchmarks, including common-sense reasoning, world knowledge, and reading comprehension. Despite its straightforward training approach, Llama-2 demonstrates capabilities across various NLP
tasks [9]. While large language models exhibit remarkable capabilities
in generating and understanding natural language, fine-tuning may be
necessary for optimal performance in specific tasks or domains. Another
advancement that enhances the ability of an LLM to generate text is
the retrieval augmented generation (RAG), which is concerned with
augmenting the LLM context window with the most relevant text.
Our approach leverages the strengths of both components: The first
component is RAG, which addresses three key challenges in TQA: (1)
It effectively handles long lessons by retrieving only the most relevant
paragraphs from the textbook, ensuring that information is more focused. (2) It reduces noise that could distract the answer generation
process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-ofdomain’’ problem by retrieving external knowledge from other lessons
that may not be present in the immediate lesson context, allowing
the model to handle questions with missing or spread-out information.
Llama-2, the second component, enhances the model’s ability to reason
over the retrieved passages and benefits from its extensive pre-training,
allowing it to generate answers that are both accurate and contextually
relevant, even in challenging scenarios.
Although TQA is a multimodal task by nature, involving text as well
as visual components like figures and diagrams, this study concentrates
on the textual part of TQA. We believe that improving the textual
TQA is an essential first step towards developing a more complete TQA
system that can process multimodal inputs. In order to fully address
the challenges of the TQA task, future research will investigate the
integration of visual data. Our model achieves state-of-the-art performance in both true/false and multiple-choice question answering,
showing notable improvements over current approaches. These results
demonstrate how much our retrieval-augmented method improves TQA
performance.
The paper is organized as follows: An overview of the related works
and the dataset used in our investigation is given in Sections 2 and
3, respectively. The architecture and implementation details of the
components are explained in Section 4. In Section 5, we present the
experiments along with their findings and further extend the experiments in the ablation study. Section 6 finally brings our efforts to a
close.
2. Related work
Research on TQA started with the main paper MemN [4] where
they applied MRC models like BiDAF [12] and VQA models [4]. Those
models performed poorly with an accuracy 2.49% less than the lowest validation accuracy achieved and 35.78% less than the highest
validation accuracy achieved on the TQA dataset due to the inherent
challenges the dataset presents.
Research on TQA has been categorized into three sets according
to [13]: graph-based, pretraining-based, and interpretability-based.
The graph-based studies focus on utilizing graph-based methods to
address TQA, including the works of MoCA [14], IGMN [6], RAFR [15]
and, DIMP [16]. MoCA tried to solve the gap between specific and
general domains by introducing pre-trained language models on a
general domain. They regard textual context and diagrams as knowledge and select the set of top-k supporting sentences and graph nodes
(knowledge) for a question and then compare the performance of
different knowledge representations. They apply external knowledge to
enhance the span-level representation. The text in MoCA was encoded
using a multi-stage pre-trained module (RoBerta) that was pre-trained
on Wikipedia and BookCurpus dataset for the Random mask strategy
and CK12-QA for the span mask strategy. The encoder was fine-tuned
on RACE and TQA datasets. To obtain the features of the question and
instructional diagrams in MoCA they used a transformer encoder and
added a linear projection layer to align the text and visual parts of
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-ofRow 1: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: which is referred to as ‘‘out-of-domain’’ problem. The out-of-domain domain’’ problem by retrieving external knowledge from other lessons
Row 2: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: problem brings the need for some techniques that retrieve the relevant that may not be present in the immediate lesson context, allowing
Row 3: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: context from all the available lessons and not only the lesson where the the model to handle questions with missing or spread-out information.
Row 4: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: question in. Llama-2, the second component, enhances the model’s ability to reason
Row 5: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: The TQA dataset (CK12-QA) demonstrates a high level of under- over the retrieved passages and benefits from its extensive pre-training,
Row 6: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: standing, as shown in Fig. 1. The question on the left requires extracting allowing it to generate answers that are both accurate and contextually
Row 7: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: an answer from multiple sentences. In contrast, the question on the relevant, even in challenging scenarios.
Row 8: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: right aims to compare two scenarios to explain a complex concept in a Although TQA is a multimodal task by nature, involving text as well
Row 9: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: simpler or more relatable way. It also requires the ability to handle as visual components like figures and diagrams, this study concentrates
Row 10: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: qualitative and quantitative data, along with a deep understanding on the textual part of TQA. We believe that improving the textual
Row 11: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: of language nuances related to negation, conjunction, or common TQA is an essential first step towards developing a more complete TQA
Row 12: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: sense [7]. system that can process multimodal inputs. In order to fully address
Row 13: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: Recent works on TQA used advanced deep learning techniques the challenges of the TQA task, future research will investigate the
Row 14: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: but still lacks the ability to resolve some of the existing challenges, integration of visual data. Our model achieves state-of-the-art perRow 15: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: more specifically the challenge of capturing the textual information formance in both true/false and multiple-choice question answering,
Row 16: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: showing notable improvements over current approaches. These resultson the context and the ability to adequately reason over such lengthy
Row 17: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: demonstrate how much our retrieval-augmented method improves TQAlessons. The TQA task is vital due to its real-life modality, reflecting the
Row 18: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: complexities of questions and contexts found in textbooks, emphasizingperformance.
Row 19: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: The paper is organized as follows: An overview of the related worksits importance as a knowledge source and the achieved accuracy needs
Row 20: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: and the dataset used in our investigation is given in Sections to be improved.2 and
Row 21: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: 3, respectively. The architecture and implementation details of the
Row 22: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: These challenges must be addressed and resolved by incorporating
Row 23: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: components are explained in Section 4. In Section 5, we present the
Row 24: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: the latest advancements in both MRC and CV. Recent advancements in
Row 25: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: experiments along with their findings and further extend the experiRow 26: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: Large Language Models (LLM) such as, GPT [8] and Llama-2 [9], have
Row 27: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: ments in the ablation study. Section 6 finally brings our efforts to a
Row 28: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: demonstrated an improved understanding and comprehending of text
Row 29: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: close.
Row 30: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: and question answering [10]. When information is provided within the
Row 31: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: LLM context window, these models excel at generating responses that
Row 32: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: 2. Related work
Row 33: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: are cohere and contextually relevant. However, LLMs have significant
Row 34: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: difficulties when used for TQA, especially when dealing with longRow 35: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: Research on TQA started with the main paper MemN [4] where
Row 36: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: context inquiries and out-of-domain scenarios. LLMs can be misleading
Row 37: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: they applied MRC models like BiDAF [12] and VQA models [4]. Those
Row 38: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: in these cases where the actual relevant information might be scatteredmodels performed poorly with an accuracy 2.49% less than the lowRow 39: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: across the different lessons or even missing causing inaccurate answers.est validation accuracy achieved and 35.78% less than the highest
Row 40: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: We suggest a novel framework that combines the Llama-2 large lan-validation accuracy achieved on the TQA dataset due to the inherent
Row 41: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: guage model with retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to address challenges the dataset presents.
Row 42: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: these issues. Research on TQA has been categorized into three sets according
Row 43: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: Llama-2, an LLM, has achieved the highest performance among to [13]: graph-based, pretraining-based, and interpretability-based.
Row 44: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: open-source LLMs, surpassing models like Falcon [11] on standard aca- The graph-based studies focus on utilizing graph-based methods to
Row 45: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: demic benchmarks, including common-sense reasoning, world knowl- address TQA, including the works of MoCA [14], IGMN [6], RAFR [15]
Row 46: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: edge, and reading comprehension. Despite its straightforward train- and, DIMP [16]. MoCA tried to solve the gap between specific and
Row 47: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: ing approach, Llama-2 demonstrates capabilities across various NLP general domains by introducing pre-trained language models on a
Row 48: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: tasks [9]. While large language models exhibit remarkable capabilities general domain. They regard textual context and diagrams as knowlRow 49: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: in generating and understanding natural language, fine-tuning may be edge and select the set of top-k supporting sentences and graph nodes
Row 50: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: necessary for optimal performance in specific tasks or domains. Another (knowledge) for a question and then compare the performance of
Row 51: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: advancement that enhances the ability of an LLM to generate text is different knowledge representations. They apply external knowledge to
Row 52: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: the retrieval augmented generation (RAG), which is concerned with enhance the span-level representation. The text in MoCA was encoded
Row 53: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: augmenting the LLM context window with the most relevant text. using a multi-stage pre-trained module (RoBerta) that was pre-trained
Row 54: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: Our approach leverages the strengths of both components: The first on Wikipedia and BookCurpus dataset for the Random mask strategy
Row 55: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: component is RAG, which addresses three key challenges in TQA: (1) and CK12-QA for the span mask strategy. The encoder was fine-tuned
Row 56: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: It effectively handles long lessons by retrieving only the most relevant on RACE and TQA datasets. To obtain the features of the question and
Row 57: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: paragraphs from the textbook, ensuring that information is more fo- instructional diagrams in MoCA they used a transformer encoder and
Row 58: is that some concepts are explained in different lessons within TQA, process by filtering out irrelevant content. (3) RAG solves the ‘‘out-of-: cused. (2) It reduces noise that could distract the answer generation added a linear projection layer to align the text and visual parts of
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
the image into a common space. To enhance the model, they used a
feedforward and layer normalization to obtain the features from the
multihead-guided attention layer.
IGMN attempted to find the contradictions between textual contexts
and candidate answers to build a Contradiction Entity-Relationship
Graph (CERG). They utilized hand-written semantic rules to comprehend long essays via CERG where they used the Stanford Parser and the
Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) to build it. They utilize spatial analysis rules to comprehend diagrams via contradiction entity-relationship
graph. They used BiLSTM and VGG Net.
RAFR seeks to learn an effective diagram representations and the
questions, options, and the closest paragraph were fed into an LSTM
to get their representations. They analyze the relative positions and
dependencies between text within diagrams to build a relation graph
based and then apply dual attention to predict answers. They apply
graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR considers only the text on the diagram, and that causes a loss of other
important visual information.
DIMP introduced the Diagram Perception Network, an end-to-end
model that integrates diagram understanding with text comprehension.
DIMP adopts a joint optimization strategy that simultaneously handles relation prediction, diagram classification, and question answering
tasks. The DIMP model uses a graph-based approach to handle diagram understanding by representing diagrams as relational graphs and
capturing semantic propagation within them.
The pretraining-based papers propose a multistage pre-training approach for the model, followed by fine-tuning using the TQA dataset
and a final step of ensemble learning, as seen in the works of ISAAC [7],
WSTQ [17]m and MRHF [18]. ISAAC attempts to overcome critical
challenges such as the complexity and relatively small size of TQA
dataset and the scarcity of large diagram datasets. ISAAC deals with
every type of question separately ignoring the correlation between
different types of questions and relays on fine-tuning large pre-trained
models, ensemble learning, and large datasets. They incorporate a
pre-trained transformer (RoBERTa) model to encode text and bottomup top-down (BUTD) attention with six model ensembles for feature
extraction. They use four knowledge retrievers: information retrieval
(IR), next sentence prediction (NSP), nearest neighbors (NN), and
diagram retrieval. The textual ISAAC is pre-trained on RACE, ARCChallenge, and OpenBookQA datasets and fine-tuned on CK12-QA. For
a visual understanding, they extract the visual features of the diagram
constituents and apply BUTD attention to answer diagram questions.
They used BUTD highlight the most relevant diagrams or visuals for
each question. The multimodal ISAAC is pre-trained on VQA abstract
scenes, VQA and AI2D datasets and fine-tuned on CK12-QA.
WSTQ tries to learn effective diagram representations. They applied
a text-matching task to comprehend the text and applied a relationdetection task to learn the diagram semantic. They consider the region
representations and the relationships between them to learn more
effective diagram representation.
MRHF proposed a Multistage Retrieval and Hierarchical Fusion,
a novel framework that incorporates dense passage re-ranking and
a mixture-of-experts architecture to enhance TQA performance. The
framework then integrates multimodal feature fusion to process both
textual and heterogeneous diagram features, using a unified question
solver for different question types.
The third category uses span-level evidence during the answering
process in order to provide an explanation for question answering
which — to some extent — achieves a sufficient level of interpretability
as in the work of XTQA [17]. XTQA puts explainability first place by
providing the students with the explanations accurately which helps
them have a deeper understanding of what they have learned. They regard the whole textual context of the lesson as candidate evidence and
then applies a fine-grained algorithm to extract span level explanations
for answering questions. They apply a self-supervised learning method
SimCLR to learn the representation in the TQA dataset.
Fig. 2. Kind of retrievers used in the current works of TQA task.
While our work also aims to improve TQA task, we focus on refining
the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal
integration. Unlike previous works, our approach does not yet incorporate visual data. However, by integrating Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) with Llama-2, we address critical challenges such as long
contexts, out-of-domain scenarios, and noise reduction in the retrieval
process, which are often overlooked in multimodal approaches.
The retrievers in the previous studies, which are an essential component of traditional QA systems, are employed to retrieve relevant
passages likely to contain the correct answer. Retrievers can be sparse,
relying on classical information retrieval (IR) methods like TF-IDF [19],
dense, incorporating DL retrieval methods as in REALM [20] and
ORQA [21], or iterative, as in MUPPET [22]. As handling the long
context was a main challenge in TQA, efforts to enhance the process of retrieving the relevant text to a question are needed. The
retrieved document is then processed through a post-processing or
ranking component.
Many current works have used a statistical retriever (TF-IDF) as in
the work of MemN, IGMN, EAMB. Some have utilized a search engine
as in MHTQA, while others employed transformer-based models (BERT,
RoBERTa) as shown in Fig. 2.
Advancements in retrieving information related to questions for
comprehension have been made with the use of semantic search [23].
This involves embedding the entire context into a vector space, calculating distances to find measurable relationships, and retrieving the
closest (related) ones to an embedded question or query. As TQA
retrievers needs to be enhanced with more accurate ways of retrieving
relevant context, semantic search serves this need by embedding the
entire lessons into a vector space and calculating distances, which
improves the comprehension of related context.
Despite significant progress in current TQA systems, a fundamental
challenge remains related to reasoning capabilities, text understanding, and handling long contexts within these models, as indicated by
the moderately low accuracy achieved. Those models may provide a
general answer without going into much detail about the particular
responses or results. This suggests that the model’s ability to reason
in situations requiring a deeper level of comprehension is limited.
3. Textbook question answering dataset
The TQA dataset consists of 1076 lessons that cover life science,
earth science, and physical science. Each lesson in the TQA dataset is
accompanied by multiple-choice questions, with each question offering
2–8 answer options.
The questions are categorized as non-diagram true/false (NDTF)
questions, which have a true or false possible answer, non-diagram
multiple-choice (NDMC) questions, which have 4–7 answer choices,
and diagram multiple-choice (DMC) questions, which have four candidate answers. The dataset focuses exclusively on factoid questions,
which are questions that can be answered with simple facts or named
entities. The answers will be provided in a multiple-choice form. The
answers are provided in a multiple-choice format. The dataset was
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con- | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal
Row 1: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: siders only the text on the diagram, and that causes a loss of other | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: integration. Unlike previous works, our approach does not yet incorpoRow 2: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: important visual information. | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: rate visual data. However, by integrating Retrieval-Augmented GenerRow 3: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: DIMP introduced the Diagram Perception Network, an end-to-end | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: ation (RAG) with Llama-2, we address critical challenges such as long
Row 4: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: model that integrates diagram understanding with text comprehension. | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: contexts, out-of-domain scenarios, and noise reduction in the retrieval
Row 5: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: DIMP adopts a joint optimization strategy that simultaneously han- | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: process, which are often overlooked in multimodal approaches.
Row 6: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: dles relation prediction, diagram classification, and question answering | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: The retrievers in the previous studies, which are an essential comRow 7: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: tasks. The DIMP model uses a graph-based approach to handle dia- | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: ponent of traditional QA systems, are employed to retrieve relevant
Row 8: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: gram understanding by representing diagrams as relational graphs and | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: passages likely to contain the correct answer. Retrievers can be sparse,
Row 9: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: capturing semantic propagation within them. | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: relying on classical information retrieval (IR) methods like TF-IDF [19],
Row 10: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: The pretraining-based papers propose a multistage pre-training ap- | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: dense, incorporating DL retrieval methods as in REALM [20] and
Row 11: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: proach for the model, followed by fine-tuning using the TQA dataset | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: ORQA [21], or iterative, as in MUPPET [22]. As handling the long
Row 12: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: and a final step of ensemble learning, as seen in the works of ISAAC [7], | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: context was a main challenge in TQA, efforts to enhance the proRow 13: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: WSTQ [17]m and MRHF [18]. ISAAC attempts to overcome critical | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: cess of retrieving the relevant text to a question are needed. The
Row 14: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: challenges such as the complexity and relatively small size of TQA | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: retrieved document is then processed through a post-processing or
Row 15: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: dataset and the scarcity of large diagram datasets. ISAAC deals with | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: ranking component.
Row 16: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: every type of question separately ignoring the correlation between | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: Many current works have used a statistical retriever (TF-IDF) as in
Row 17: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: different types of questions and relays on fine-tuning large pre-trained | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: the work of MemN, IGMN, EAMB. Some have utilized a search engine
Row 18: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: models, ensemble learning, and large datasets. They incorporate a | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: as in MHTQA, while others employed transformer-based models (BERT,
Row 19: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: pre-trained transformer (RoBERTa) model to encode text and bottom- | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: RoBERTa) as shown in Fig. 2.
Row 20: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: up top-down (BUTD) attention with six model ensembles for feature | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: Advancements in retrieving information related to questions for
Row 21: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: extraction. They use four knowledge retrievers: information retrieval | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: comprehension have been made with the use of semantic search [23].
Row 22: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: (IR), next sentence prediction (NSP), nearest neighbors (NN), and | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: This involves embedding the entire context into a vector space, calRow 23: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: diagram retrieval. The textual ISAAC is pre-trained on RACE, ARC- | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: culating distances to find measurable relationships, and retrieving the
Row 24: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: Challenge, and OpenBookQA datasets and fine-tuned on CK12-QA. For | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: closest (related) ones to an embedded question or query. As TQA
Row 25: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: a visual understanding, they extract the visual features of the diagram | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: retrievers needs to be enhanced with more accurate ways of retrieving
Row 26: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: constituents and apply BUTD attention to answer diagram questions. | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: relevant context, semantic search serves this need by embedding the
Row 27: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: They used BUTD highlight the most relevant diagrams or visuals for | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: entire lessons into a vector space and calculating distances, which
Row 28: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: each question. The multimodal ISAAC is pre-trained on VQA abstract | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: improves the comprehension of related context.
Row 29: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: scenes, VQA and AI2D datasets and fine-tuned on CK12-QA. | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: Despite significant progress in current TQA systems, a fundamental
Row 30: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: WSTQ tries to learn effective diagram representations. They applied | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: challenge remains related to reasoning capabilities, text understandRow 31: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: a text-matching task to comprehend the text and applied a relation- | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: ing, and handling long contexts within these models, as indicated by
Row 32: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: detection task to learn the diagram semantic. They consider the region | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: the moderately low accuracy achieved. Those models may provide a
Row 33: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: representations and the relationships between them to learn more | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: general answer without going into much detail about the particular
Row 34: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: effective diagram representation. | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: responses or results. This suggests that the model’s ability to reason
Row 35: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: MRHF proposed a Multistage Retrieval and Hierarchical Fusion, | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: in situations requiring a deeper level of comprehension is limited.
Row 36: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: a novel framework that incorporates dense passage re-ranking and | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal:
Row 37: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: a mixture-of-experts architecture to enhance TQA performance. The | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: 3. Textbook question answering dataset
Row 38: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: framework then integrates multimodal feature fusion to process both | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal:
Row 39: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: textual and heterogeneous diagram features, using a unified question | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: The TQA dataset consists of 1076 lessons that cover life science,
Row 40: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: solver for different question types. | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: earth science, and physical science. Each lesson in the TQA dataset is
Row 41: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: The third category uses span-level evidence during the answering | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: accompanied by multiple-choice questions, with each question offering
Row 42: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: process in order to provide an explanation for question answering | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: 2–8 answer options.
Row 43: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: which — to some extent — achieves a sufficient level of interpretability | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: The questions are categorized as non-diagram true/false (NDTF)
Row 44: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: as in the work of XTQA [17]. XTQA puts explainability first place by | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: questions, which have a true or false possible answer, non-diagram
Row 45: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: providing the students with the explanations accurately which helps | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: multiple-choice (NDMC) questions, which have 4–7 answer choices,
Row 46: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: them have a deeper understanding of what they have learned. They re- | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: and diagram multiple-choice (DMC) questions, which have four canRow 47: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: gard the whole textual context of the lesson as candidate evidence and | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: didate answers. The dataset focuses exclusively on factoid questions,
Row 48: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: then applies a fine-grained algorithm to extract span level explanations | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: which are questions that can be answered with simple facts or named
Row 49: graph attention networks (GATs) to understand diagrams. RAFR con-: for answering questions. They apply a self-supervised learning method | the textual component of the task as a foundation for future multimodal: entities. The answers will be provided in a multiple-choice form. The
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
Table 1
TQA dataset (CK12-TQA) statistics, including non-diagram (ND) questions.
Dataset Train Dev Test Total
CK12-TQA 15,154 5309 5797 26,260
– 𝑁 𝐷 𝑇 𝐹 3490 998 912 5400
– 𝑁 𝐷 𝑀 𝐶 5163 1530 1600 8293
– 𝐷 𝑀 𝐶 𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 6501 2781 3285 12,567
ND questions Total 8653 2528 2512 13,693
divided into training, validation, and testing sets, each containing
lessons and both non-diagram and diagram questions. Table 1 shows
the distribution of all question types and their respective counts, highlighting the total number of ND questions in each split, which are the
primary focus of our training and evaluation.
4. Methodology
4.1. Information retrieval
As in the original work of RAG [24], it has been applied to retrieve
relevant knowledge to be fed into a generative model like GPT to
generate responses with regard to that knowledge.
While RAG was primarily used in open-domain QA, they apply it
to retrieve knowledge from external resources such as Wikipedia. In
contrast, our work focuses on building a RAG model for the textbook
content only to retrieve a domain-specific context where lessons are
long and the context is often spread across multiple sections, introducing more complexity. Additionally, we extend RAG by integrating it
with a fine-tuned LLM on our specific dataset, Llama-2, to enhance reasoning by generating more contextually relevant answers and benefit
from its extensive pre-training.
In the Textbook Question Answering (TQA) task, it is crucial to
provide relevant context from the textbook to accurately answer questions. However, the pre-trained large language model (LLM) may not
fully capture all the necessary information from the textbook during
its pre-training phase, leading to gaps in knowledge. To bridge this
gap, our approach involves augmenting the LLM’s context window
with relevant lesson content retrieved directly from the textbook using
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG).
Our experiments demonstrate that relying solely on the LLM’s pretrained knowledge is often insufficient, underscoring the importance
of RAG in enhancing answer generation. As illustrated in Fig. 3, RAG
augments the LLM’s knowledge by incorporating the relevant topics
from the TQA dataset, effectively combining the pretrained knowledge of the LLM with the domain-specific content from our textbook
corpus. This augmentation ensures that the LLM has access to the
most relative information when generating answers. For example, when
answering a question that requires a context from different lessons,
RAG retrieves these relevant parts and feeds them into the LLM’s context window, allowing the LLM to produce accurate and contextually
relevant answers.
RAG presents a solution to address the issue of scattered information
across lessons in TQA, while also reducing the risk of hallucinations in
LLM responses by providing contextual grounding for the LLM to infer
answers.
The IR pipeline in our architecture, as shown in Fig. 4, begins
with vector embedding of the textbook content using the OpenAI textembedding-ada-002 model. These embeddings are then stored in a
vector database, which acts as a searchable repository for retrieving
relevant information. When a question is posed, it is first embedded
into the same vector space, allowing the query retrieval process to
search the database for passages with the highest similarity scores. If
necessary, the retrieved information is re-ranked by the reranker [25]
to determine its relevance to the query more accurately. Finally, the
retrieved passages are added to the LLM’s context window, providing
Fig. 3. Integrating RAG with LLM. RAG augments the LLM’s pretrained knowledge
with the textbook knowledge, ensuring a more comprehensive understanding of the
textbook content.
the model with relevant information for generating more accurate
answers.
The dimensionality of the vector database is determined by the
embedding model, and similarity metrics such as cosine similarity or
dot product are used to calculate relevance [2], ensuring that the most
contextually appropriate passages are retrieved.
The workflow of the RAG in TQA is illustrated in 5. It starts with a
TQA question, which may include an image. This question is embedded
using an embedding model (text-embedding-ada-002), transforming
both the text and image into vector representations. These vectors are
stored in a Vector Database (Vector DB) alongside embedded lessons
or topics. A retriever then accesses this database to fetch relevant
context based on the embedded question. Finally, this retrieved context,
along with the original question and answer options, is provided to a
large language model (LLM) as a prompt to generate the final answer
output. LLMs that incorporate RAG in their architecture are referred to
as RAG models [24], and these models have been shown to improve
accuracy [26,27].
Our method integrates a RAG framework to accurately and reliably
answer scientific questions, particularly addressing the ‘‘out-of-domain’’
problem where some questions require inferring answers from sentences in different lessons. To formulate the problem, we have several
questions with Qi representing the vector embedding of question i
within the lesson, and several topics from which answers may be derived, with Tj as the vector embedding of topic j. The vector database,
created by the search tool, returns relevant chunks through vector
search. We use a dot product metric to compute similarity by multiplying the two vectors and measuring the distance between them in
terms of their directions. Qi and Tj in Eq. (1) represent the query vector
and topic vector, respectively. This similarity score enables the retrieval
system to identify the most contextually relevant passages, which are
integrated into the LLM’s context window to generate accurate answers.
Similarity(𝑄𝑖, 𝑇𝑗 ) = 𝑄𝑖 ⋅ 𝑇𝑗 (1)
4.2. Fine-tuning large language model, Llama-2
The latest language models introduced in the TQA task include
pretrained transformers [7,28], aiming to enhance TQA system performance in terms of accuracy. With the growing impact of LLMs on the
field of AI, integrating these models into the TQA task becomes crucial
for accuracy improvement. Auto-regressive models, or decoder-only
models, represent a category of Transformer models trained extensively
in a self-supervised manner [29]. While initially designed for predicting the next token in a sequence, they are adapted for QA through
techniques like supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning
from human feedback.
Our work utilizes the Llama-2 [9] model as the foundation for finetuning due to its significant language understanding and generation
capabilities. Llama-2 represents an enhancement over Llama-1 with
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: with vector embedding of the textbook content using the OpenAI text- | for accuracy improvement. Auto-regressive models, or decoder-only
Row 1: with vector embedding of the textbook content using the OpenAI text-: embedding-ada-002 model. These embeddings are then stored in a | for accuracy improvement. Auto-regressive models, or decoder-only: models, represent a category of Transformer models trained extensively
Row 2: with vector embedding of the textbook content using the OpenAI text-: vector database, which acts as a searchable repository for retrieving | for accuracy improvement. Auto-regressive models, or decoder-only: in a self-supervised manner [29]. While initially designed for predictRow 3: with vector embedding of the textbook content using the OpenAI text-: relevant information. When a question is posed, it is first embedded | for accuracy improvement. Auto-regressive models, or decoder-only: ing the next token in a sequence, they are adapted for QA through
Row 4: with vector embedding of the textbook content using the OpenAI text-: into the same vector space, allowing the query retrieval process to | for accuracy improvement. Auto-regressive models, or decoder-only: techniques like supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=4 index=2]
Columns: Table 1 | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: Table 1: TQA dataset (CK12-TQA) statistics, including non-diagram (ND) questions. | Unnamed: 0:
Row 2: Table 1: Dataset Train Dev Test | Unnamed: 0: Total
Row 3: Table 1: CK12-TQA 15,154 5309 5797 | Unnamed: 0: 26,260
Row 4: Table 1: – N D T F 3490 998 912 | Unnamed: 0: 5400
Row 5: Table 1: – N D M C 5163 1530 1600 | Unnamed: 0: 8293
Row 6: Table 1: – D M C Questions 6501 2781 3285 | Unnamed: 0: 12,567
Row 7: Table 1: ND questions Total 8653 2528 2512 | Unnamed: 0: 13,693
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
Fig. 4. Pipeline of RAG model in TQA task.
Fig. 5. The integration process of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) with LLaMA2 for answering textual TQA questions.
increased training data and a larger context window (4096 tokens).
Trained on 2 trillion tokens of data and scaled to 70 billion parameters,
Llama-2 stands out as one of the best-performing open-source LLMs. Its
availability for research and prowess in reasoning and reading comprehension make it a valuable asset [9]. Integrating Llama-2’s knowledge
with the results of RAG adds further depth to its existing training.
Fine-tuning and prompt engineering are employed to enhance LLMs’
reasoning abilities [30]. Prompt engineering enables in-context learning via prompts [31,32]. In SFT, models are trained using input examples and corresponding outputs. Prompts guide the model in a way that
is optimal for the downstream task.
The process of generating answers for the TQA dataset using RAG
approach integrated with the Llama-2 model is outlined in Algorithm 1.
The algorithm starts with the preprocessing of the dataset, where text is
tokenized and the features are extracted using the embedding model to
prepare the data for the model training. Next step focuses on retrieving
the top 𝑁 relevant chunks for every question using the embeddings.
The next step is fine-tuning Llama-2 with the retrieved context where
we combine the input question, retrieved context, multiple-choice options, and correct answer to fine-tune the LLaMA-2 model. This allows
the model to learn how to generate answers using both the retrieved
data and labeled examples. The fine-tuned model produces the final
answer using the integrated context.
In this algorithm, finetuning refers to adapting the pretrained
LLaMA-2 model on the CK12-QA dataset using Supervised Fine-Tuning
(SFT). Apply LoRA means adding low-rank adapter layers to the frozen
pretrained model weights, which enables efficient training without
modifying the base model parameters.
Algorithm 1 Textbook Question Answering Using RAG with
LLaMA-2
Input: TQA Dataset (CK12-QA) containing questions, diagrams, and
multiple-choice options
Output: Generated answers for the questions
1 1. Data Preprocessing
2 foreach lesson in the dataset do
3 Tokenize all text Extract features using
text-embedding-ada-002 model
4 Store preprocessed data in a structured format
5 2. Retrieving Relevant Context
6 foreach question in the dataset do
7 Embed the question using the text-embedding-ada-002 model.
Retrieve the top N most relevant context chunks (text
information) from the vector database based on similarity
scores
8 3. Fine-Tuning LLaMA-2 with Retrieved Context
9 Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT):
10 Apply LoRA to add adapter layers to the model
11 Initialize the pre-trained LLaMA-2 model
12 Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT): foreach (question, retrieved
context, options, correct answer) tuple do
13 Combine the question, retrieved context, multiple-choice
options, and correct answer
14 Fine-tune only the adapter layers while keeping the main
model weights fixed
15 4. Generating the Final Answer
16 foreach question do
17 Use the fine-tuned LLaMA-2 model with integrated RAG to
generate the final answer.
18 return Generated answers for all questions in the dataset
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[PAGE 6]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
Fig. 6. Prompt format used to fine-tune Llama-2.
Fig. 6 illustrates the general format in which we processed the
TQA dataset for the Llama-2 prompt, ensuring compatibility with the
CK12-QA dataset and the model architecture.
Llama-2 underwent fine-tuning through transfer learning on the
CK12-QA dataset. This phase involved updating the model’s weights
through additional training epochs specifically designed for the textbook QA domain. The objective of fine-tuning Llama-2 was to improve
its performance and safety, thus paving the way for more responsible
LLM creation.
The fine-tuning step is crucial for adapting the LLM to a specific
task. However, one of the risks associated with fine-tuning largescale pretrained language models is catastrophic forgetting [33], where
the model may forget some of its previous knowledge while updating parameters during fine-tuning. To address this issue, SFT is employed [34].
SFT is tailored to enhance pretrained models for supervised learning
tasks using smaller datasets compared to those used for the initial pretraining of the LLM. It offers memory-efficient training using techniques
like parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [35] to reduce training
memory usage and enable the quantization of the model. Quantization
involves transforming activations and parameters from floating-point
values into lower-precision data types, such as 8-bit integers or even
lower [36].
PEFT involves freezing the parameters of the LLM llama2, introducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning
only on the newly added layers using examples from our CK12-QA
dataset as shown in our finetuning pipeline Fig. 7. Freezing the LLM’s
parameters and updating only the new parameters on the added layer
(adapter layers) brings multiple benefits, including reducing storage
requirements, minimizing fine-tuning time, and preventing the loss
of LLM knowledge that may occur by updating all model parameters
during fine-tuning (see Fig. 7).
5. Experiment and results
In this section, We explore the empirical assessment of our suggested methodology, providing a thorough description of the experimental setup, tests that were conducted and results that were attained.
5.1. Experimental settings
We conducted experiments that explored the interaction between
fine-tuning and RAG to show their effectiveness across the textual
questions in the TQA dataset. We first established a baseline performance using zero-shot inference with pretrained LLaMA-2 on CK12-QA.
Next, we compared fine-tuning strategies, including supervised finetuning (SFT) and parameter-efficient LoRA. For retrieval mechanisms,
we integrated RAG with and without re-ranking to assess its impact
on accuracy. We also performed subset evaluations on True/False and
Multiple-Choice questions, excluding diagram-based content for a fair
comparison. Finally, an ablation study analyzed the individual contributions of RAG, finetuning, and re-ranking. This evaluation provides a
detailed understanding of our system’s performance.
Fig. 7. Our finetuning pipeline.
All training and evaluation were conducted on a single server
equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFTTrainer [34]. We enhanced the parametric-memory generation model
Llama-2 with a non-parametric memory through RAG. For the finetuning step, we employed a PEFT technique called low-rank adaptation
(LORA) [37]. The goal of PEFT, specifically LORA, is to reduce the
training cost of Large Language Models (LLMs) with a vast number
of parameters, reaching into billions. This is achieved by minimizing
the number of updated parameters during fine-tuning. LORA introduces trainable rank decomposition matrices to every layer in the
transformer architecture [38]. It adapts only the weight matrices in
the self-attention module for downstream tasks and utilizes Adam for
model optimization. All weight tensors are quantized to 4 bits using
the bitsandbytes library [36] with a method called quantized LORA
(QLORA) [39], aiming to decrease the model’s size and speed up
inference. The primary objective of quantization is to minimize the
impact on a model’s performance while reducing its memory footprint
and processing requirements.
In the SFT stage, we used processed CK12-QA data with a cosine
learning rate schedule (learning rate: 2 × 10−4), a weight decay of 0.001,
a batch size of 4, and a sequence length of 512 tokens. For the finetuning process, each sample consisted of a prompt and an answer. To
ensure the model sequence length is properly filled, we concatenated all
the prompts and answers from the training set, using a special token to
separate prompt and answer segments. We employed an auto-regressive
objective, zeroing out the loss on tokens from the user prompt, and
backpropagating only on answer tokens. Finally, we fine-tuned the
model for 2 epochs. Regarding LORA configurations, we set the Alpha
parameter to 16, used a dropout parameter of 0.1, and the rank of the
update matrices used for LORA is 64.
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFTRow 1: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: only on the newly added layers using examples from our CK12-QA Trainer [34]. We enhanced the parametric-memory generation model
Row 2: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: dataset as shown in our finetuning pipeline Fig. 7. Freezing the LLM’s Llama-2 with a non-parametric memory through RAG. For the fineRow 3: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: parameters and updating only the new parameters on the added layer tuning step, we employed a PEFT technique called low-rank adaptation
Row 4: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: (adapter layers) brings multiple benefits, including reducing storage (LORA) [37]. The goal of PEFT, specifically LORA, is to reduce the
Row 5: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: requirements, minimizing fine-tuning time, and preventing the loss training cost of Large Language Models (LLMs) with a vast number
Row 6: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: of LLM knowledge that may occur by updating all model parameters of parameters, reaching into billions. This is achieved by minimizing
Row 7: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: during fine-tuning (see Fig. 7). the number of updated parameters during fine-tuning. LORA introRow 8: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: duces trainable rank decomposition matrices to every layer in the
Row 9: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: 5. Experiment and results transformer architecture [38]. It adapts only the weight matrices in
Row 10: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: the self-attention module for downstream tasks and utilizes Adam for
Row 11: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: In this section, We explore the empirical assessment of our sug- model optimization. All weight tensors are quantized to 4 bits using
Row 12: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: gested methodology, providing a thorough description of the experi- the bitsandbytes library [36] with a method called quantized LORA
Row 13: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: mental setup, tests that were conducted and results that were attained. (QLORA) [39], aiming to decrease the model’s size and speed up
Row 14: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: inference. The primary objective of quantization is to minimize the
Row 15: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: 5.1. Experimental settings impact on a model’s performance while reducing its memory footprint
Row 16: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: and processing requirements.
Row 17: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: We conducted experiments that explored the interaction between In the SFT stage, we used processed CK12-QA data with a cosine
Row 18: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: −4fine-tuning and RAG to show their effectiveness across the textual learning rate schedule (learning rate: 2 × 10 ), a weight decay of 0.001,
Row 19: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: questions in the TQA dataset. We first established a baseline perfor- a batch size of 4, and a sequence length of 512 tokens. For the fineRow 20: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: mance using zero-shot inference with pretrained LLaMA-2 on CK12-QA. tuning process, each sample consisted of a prompt and an answer. To
Row 21: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: Next, we compared fine-tuning strategies, including supervised fine- ensure the model sequence length is properly filled, we concatenated all
Row 22: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: tuning (SFT) and parameter-efficient LoRA. For retrieval mechanisms, the prompts and answers from the training set, using a special token to
Row 23: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: we integrated RAG with and without re-ranking to assess its impact separate prompt and answer segments. We employed an auto-regressive
Row 24: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: on accuracy. We also performed subset evaluations on True/False and objective, zeroing out the loss on tokens from the user prompt, and
Row 25: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: Multiple-Choice questions, excluding diagram-based content for a fair backpropagating only on answer tokens. Finally, we fine-tuned the
Row 26: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: comparison. Finally, an ablation study analyzed the individual contri- model for 2 epochs. Regarding LORA configurations, we set the Alpha
Row 27: ducing a trainable layer (LoRA Adapter Layers), and enabling learning equipped with an A100 GPU. During the SFT technique, we used SFT-: butions of RAG, finetuning, and re-ranking. This evaluation provides a parameter to 16, used a dropout parameter of 0.1, and the rank of the
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
Table 2
Zero-shot inference accuracy (%) of LLaMA-2 on the CK12-QA dataset’s validation and
test sets for textual questions (True/False and Multiple Choice).
Work Text T/F Text MC Text all
LLaMA-2 (Zero-Shot Validation) 46.09 27.39 34.77
LLaMA-2 (Zero-Shot Test) 48.14 27.39 35.87
Table 3
Experimental results (accuracy %) of TQA approaches on textual questions (true/false
and multiple choice) on validation and test sets.
Work/Split Year Validation (%) Test (%)
MemN [4] 2017 38.83 –
IGMN [6] 2018 46.88 –
EAMB [41] 2018 41.97 –
F-GCN [3] 2018 54.75 –
ISAAQ [7] 2020 71.76 72.13
XTQA [17] 2020 41.32 41.67
MHTQA [42] 2021 74.61 –
WSTQ [28] 2021 64.87 65.15
MoCA [14] 2021 78.28 –
RAFR [15] 2021 43.35 41.03
SSCGN [13] 2022 76.10 74.40
DDGNet [43] 2023 41.62 41.96
MRHF [18] 2024 – 82.48
PLRTQAProposed 2024 82.40 84.24
The RAG was implemented at the paragraph level by treating every
topic within the CK12-QA lessons as an independent chunk. Embeddings for these topics were generated using OpenAI’s text-embeddingada-002 model and stored in a scalable Pinecone vector database. The
same embedding model was used during inference to retrieve top-k
relevant paragraphs via dot-product similarity. We have used Cohere’s
re-ranking model rerank-english-v2.0 to refine the retrieved results
further.
5.2. Main result
We conducted a zero-shot inference experiment on the CK12-QA
dataset using the pre-trained model llama2 without finetuning on all
non-diagram diagram questions including both multiple choice and
true/false format. As depicted in Table 2 The overall accuracy on the
validation set is 34.77% with 46.09 for T/F questions and 27.39%
for MC questions. On the test set, the overall accuracy achieved is
35.87% with 48.14 for T/F questions and 27.39% for MC questions. The
low zero-shot performance results and the struggle with MC questions
compared to the simpler format of T/F questions show that the model
cannot handle complex reasoning and long lesson comprehension in
TQA tasks without further training. This performance gap compared to
our fine-tuned, RAG-augmented approach highlights the importance of
TQA task adaptation and retrieval-based enhancements.
The evaluation of the fine-tuned language model and the RAG
technique was conducted on the CK12-QA dataset. The fine-tuning
of Llama-2 was carried out on the training set following the SFT
methodology.
Inspired by [40], we fine-tuned Llama-2 on two categories of nondiagram questions: multiple choice and true/false questions simultaneously. The model was trained to complete the given prompt, and the
loss was optimized based on the provided answer by the model. Instead
of penalizing the model for predicting the next token in the given
prompt, we passed a response template to the collator. This adjustment
allowed the model’s weights to be adjusted based on the answers it
provided for the questions.
In this approach, the context in the model’s prompt was the complete lesson of the question to which it belongs. This context improvement in Llama-2 resulted in an enhancement in the test set
performance. Table 3 illustrates a 1.41% decrease in accuracy scores
on the validation set, achieving an accuracy of 82.40%. However, the
Table 4
Experimental results (accuracy %) of TQA approaches on textual questions (true/false
and multiple choice) on validation set.
Work Text T/F Text MC Text All
MemN 50.4 22.7 36.55
IGMN 57.41 40.0 46.88
EAMB 55.31 33.27 41.97
F-GCN 62.73 49.54 54.75
ISAAC 81.36 71.11 75.16
XTQA 58.24 30.33 41.32
MHTQA 82.87 69.22 74.61
WSTQ 76.65 56.30 64.33
MoCA 81.56 76.14 78.28
RAFR 53.63 36.67 43.35
SSCGN 81.50 72.58 76.10
DDGNet 57.74 31.15 41.62
DIMP 74.07 54.55 61.24
MRHF 87.88 78.95 82.48
PLRTQA𝐏𝐫 𝐨𝐩𝐨𝐬𝐞𝐝 80.72 84.97 82.40
Table 5
Experimental results (accuracy %) of TQA approaches on textual questions (true/false
and multiple choice) on test set.
Work Text T/F Text MC Text All
MemN – – –
IGMN – – –
EAMB – – –
F-GCN – – –
ISAAC 77.74 68.94 72.13
XTQA 56.22 33.40 41.67
MHTQA – – –
WSTQ 77.28 58.27 65.15
MoCA 81.36 76.31 78.14
RAFR 52.75 34.38 41.03
SSCGN 79.16 71.68 74.40
DDGNet 57.28 33.25 41.96
DIMP 75.58 55.22 62.61
MRHF 86.62 80.00 82.40
PLRTQA𝐏𝐫 𝐨𝐩𝐨𝐬𝐞𝐝 83.50 85.53 84.24
accuracy increased by 0.525% on the test set for all text questions,
reaching an accuracy of 84.24%. This demonstrates the effectiveness
of providing the entire lesson as context to the LLM.
The performance of the fine-tuned model was assessed using accuracy and compared with related works for every category of questions
in TQA, as shown in Tables 4 and 5. Utilizing comprehensive context
significantly improved accuracy, and the use of RAG in the entire
lesson resulted in different trade-offs between validation and test set
accuracies. Our best model achieved an improvement of 5.02% on the
test set overall accuracy and delivered the best performance on MC
questions across both validation and test sets, outperforming previous
state-of-the-art methods on the TQA task.
Tables 4 and 5 provide a detailed breakdown of our model’s performance on textual questions, focusing on True/False (T/F) and MultipleChoice (MC) questions, with diagram-based content excluded. To ensure fair comparisons, we used the same dataset splits as previous
works, focusing on non-diagram questions only. This allows for consistent and reliable evaluation of performance.
Table 4 provides a breakdown of results on the validation set. The
proposed model achieves an accuracy of 80.72% on T/F questions
and 84.97% on MC questions, resulting in an overall accuracy of
82.40%. However, MRHF performs best in T/F questions with 87.88%
and achieves a slightly higher overall accuracy of 82.48%, while our
method delivers the best performance on MC questions. These results
highlight the effectiveness of our method, particularly for complex MC
tasks present in TQA task.
On the test set, presented in Table 5, our model achieves the best
performance in MC questions with an accuracy of 85.53%, outperforming MRHF’s 80.00%. For T/F questions, MRHF performs better
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Work/Split | Year | Validation (%) | Test (%) | WSTQ 76.65 | 56.30 | 64.33
Row 1: Work/Split: | Year: | Validation (%): | Test (%): | WSTQ 76.65: MoCA 81.56 | 56.30: 76.14 | 64.33: 78.28
Row 2: Work/Split: MemN [4] | Year: 2017.0 | Validation (%): 38.83 | Test (%): – | WSTQ 76.65: | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 3: Work/Split: | Year: | Validation (%): | Test (%): | WSTQ 76.65: RAFR 53.63 | 56.30: 36.67 | 64.33: 43.35
Row 4: Work/Split: IGMN [6] | Year: 2018.0 | Validation (%): 46.88 | Test (%): – | WSTQ 76.65: | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 5: Work/Split: | Year: | Validation (%): | Test (%): | WSTQ 76.65: SSCGN 81.50 | 56.30: 72.58 | 64.33: 76.10
Row 6: Work/Split: EAMB [41] | Year: 2018.0 | Validation (%): 41.97 | Test (%): – | WSTQ 76.65: | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 7: Work/Split: | Year: | Validation (%): | Test (%): | WSTQ 76.65: DDGNet 57.74 | 56.30: 31.15 | 64.33: 41.62
Row 8: Work/Split: F-GCN [3] | Year: 2018.0 | Validation (%): 54.75 | Test (%): – | WSTQ 76.65: | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 9: Work/Split: | Year: | Validation (%): | Test (%): | WSTQ 76.65: DIMP 74.07 | 56.30: 54.55 | 64.33: 61.24
Row 10: Work/Split: ISAAQ [7] | Year: 2020.0 | Validation (%): 71.76 | Test (%): 72.13 | WSTQ 76.65: | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 11: Work/Split: | Year: | Validation (%): | Test (%): | WSTQ 76.65: MRHF 87.88 | 56.30: 78.95 | 64.33: 82.48
Row 12: Work/Split: XTQA [17] | Year: 2020.0 | Validation (%): 41.32 | Test (%): 41.67 | WSTQ 76.65: | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 13: Work/Split: MHTQA [42] | Year: 2021.0 | Validation (%): 74.61 | Test (%): – | WSTQ 76.65: PLRTQAPr oposed 80.72 | 56.30: 84.97 | 64.33: 82.40
Row 14: Work/Split: WSTQ [28] | Year: 2021.0 | Validation (%): 64.87 | Test (%): 65.15 | WSTQ 76.65: | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 15: Work/Split: MoCA [14] | Year: 2021.0 | Validation (%): 78.28 | Test (%): – | WSTQ 76.65: | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 16: Work/Split: RAFR [15] | Year: 2021.0 | Validation (%): 43.35 | Test (%): 41.03 | WSTQ 76.65: Table 5 | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 17: Work/Split: SSCGN [13] | Year: 2022.0 | Validation (%): 76.10 | Test (%): 74.40 | WSTQ 76.65: Experimental results (accuracy %) of TQA approaches on textual questions (true/fals | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 18: Work/Split: DDGNet [43] | Year: 2023.0 | Validation (%): 41.62 | Test (%): 41.96 | WSTQ 76.65: and multiple choice) on test set. | 56.30: | 64.33:
Row 19: Work/Split: MRHF [18] | Year: 2024.0 | Validation (%): – | Test (%): 82.48 | WSTQ 76.65: Work Text T/F | 56.30: Text MC | 64.33: Text All
Row 20: Work/Split: PLRTQAProposed | Year: 2024.0 | Validation (%): 82.40 | Test (%): 84.24 | WSTQ 76.65: MemN – | 56.30: – | 64.33: –
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=2]
Columns: Work Text T/F | Text MC | Text all | Unnamed: 0 | Work | Text T/F | Text MC.1 | Text All
Row 1: Work Text T/F: LLaMA-2 (Zero-Shot Validation) 46.09 | Text MC: 27.39 | Text all: 34.77 | Unnamed: 0: | Work: MemN | Text T/F: 50.4 | Text MC.1: 22.7 | Text All: 36.55
Row 2: Work Text T/F: LLaMA-2 (Zero-Shot Test) 48.14 | Text MC: 27.39 | Text all: 35.87 | Unnamed: 0: | Work: IGMN | Text T/F: 57.41 | Text MC.1: 40.0 | Text All: 46.88
Row 3: Work Text T/F: | Text MC: | Text all: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: EAMB | Text T/F: 55.31 | Text MC.1: 33.27 | Text All: 41.97
Row 4: Work Text T/F: | Text MC: | Text all: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: F-GCN | Text T/F: 62.73 | Text MC.1: 49.54 | Text All: 54.75
Row 5: Work Text T/F: Table 3 | Text MC: | Text all: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: ISAAC | Text T/F: 81.36 | Text MC.1: 71.11 | Text All: 75.16
Row 6: Work Text T/F: Experimental results (accuracy %) of TQA approaches on textual questions (true/false | Text MC: | Text all: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: XTQA | Text T/F: 58.24 | Text MC.1: 30.33 | Text All: 41.32
Row 7: Work Text T/F: and multiple choice) on validation and test sets. | Text MC: | Text all: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: MHTQA | Text T/F: 82.87 | Text MC.1: 69.22 | Text All: 74.61
Row 8: Work Text T/F: Work/Split Year Validation (%) | Text MC: | Text all: Test (%) | Unnamed: 0: | Work: WSTQ | Text T/F: 76.65 | Text MC.1: 56.3 | Text All: 64.33
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=3]
Columns: MRHF [18] 2024 | – | 82.48 | Unnamed: 0 | Work | Text T/F | Text MC | Text All
Row 1: MRHF [18] 2024: PLRTQAProposed 2024 | –: 82.40 | 82.48: 84.24 | Unnamed: 0: | Work: MemN | Text T/F: – | Text MC: – | Text All: –
Row 2: MRHF [18] 2024: | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: IGMN | Text T/F: – | Text MC: – | Text All: –
Row 3: MRHF [18] 2024: | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: EAMB | Text T/F: – | Text MC: – | Text All: –
Row 4: MRHF [18] 2024: | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: F-GCN | Text T/F: – | Text MC: – | Text All: –
Row 5: MRHF [18] 2024: The RAG was implemented at the paragraph level by treating every | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: ISAAC | Text T/F: 77.74 | Text MC: 68.94 | Text All: 72.13
Row 6: MRHF [18] 2024: topic within the CK12-QA lessons | –: as an independent | 82.48: chunk. Embed- | Unnamed: 0: | Work: XTQA | Text T/F: 56.22 | Text MC: 33.40 | Text All: 41.67
Row 7: MRHF [18] 2024: | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: MHTQA | Text T/F: – | Text MC: – | Text All: –
Row 8: MRHF [18] 2024: dings for these topics were generated using OpenAI’s text-embedding- | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: | Text T/F: | Text MC: | Text All:
Row 9: MRHF [18] 2024: | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: WSTQ | Text T/F: 77.28 | Text MC: 58.27 | Text All: 65.15
Row 10: MRHF [18] 2024: ada-002 model and stored in a scalable Pinecone vector database. The | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: MoCA | Text T/F: 81.36 | Text MC: 76.31 | Text All: 78.14
Row 11: MRHF [18] 2024: same embedding model was used during inference to retrieve top-k | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: RAFR | Text T/F: 52.75 | Text MC: 34.38 | Text All: 41.03
Row 12: MRHF [18] 2024: relevant paragraphs via dot-product similarity. We have used Cohere’s | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: SSCGN | Text T/F: 79.16 | Text MC: 71.68 | Text All: 74.40
Row 13: MRHF [18] 2024: | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: DDGNet | Text T/F: 57.28 | Text MC: 33.25 | Text All: 41.96
Row 14: MRHF [18] 2024: re-ranking model rerank-english-v2.0 to refine the retrieved results | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: | Text T/F: | Text MC: | Text All:
Row 15: MRHF [18] 2024: | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: DIMP | Text T/F: 75.58 | Text MC: 55.22 | Text All: 62.61
Row 16: MRHF [18] 2024: further. | –: | 82.48: | Unnamed: 0: | Work: MRHF | Text T/F: 86.62 | Text MC: 80.00 | Text All: 82.40
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
Table 6
Validation accuracy scores for different model configurations.
Configuration Validation accuracy (%)
LLaMA-2 without fine-tuning 34.77
LLaMA-2 with full lesson context (No RAG) 82.40
LLaMA-2 with RAG (No Re-ranker) 83.58
LLaMA-2 with RAG and full lesson context 83.78
LLaMA-2 with RAG + Re-ranker 80.74
Table 7
Test accuracy scores for different model configurations.
Configuration Test accuracy (%)
LLaMA-2 without fine-tuning 35.87
LLaMA-2 with full lesson context (No RAG) 84.24
LLaMA-2 with RAG (No Re-ranker) 83.80
LLaMA-2 with RAG and full lesson context 81.73
LLaMA-2 with RAG + Re-ranker 79.22
with 86.62%, compared to our model’s 83.50%. Our work achieves the
highest overall accuracy on the test set with 84.24%, outperforming
MRHF’s 82.40%. These results prove the strength of our approach
in handling challenging MC questions while maintaining competitive
performance across all categories.
5.3. Ablation study
By this section, we aim to further understand the impact of RAG
component on our finetuned model. Before incorporating RAG into our
model, we began by analyzing the number of questions in the training
data that require context from lessons other than the ones they belong
to. We measured the similarity between the questions and the topics
inside lessons by calculating the dot product of the vector-based topics
stored in a vector database and the question’s vector. Out of the 8653
samples in the training dataset of non-diagram questions, we found that
only 44% of the questions obtained a retrieved topic from the lesson
they belong to, leaving the rest with topics from other lessons.
When incorporating a re-ranking mechanism, the percentage of
questions that obtain answers from the lesson they are in rises to
52.43%. This analysis shows us the importance of using techniques
that solve the ‘‘out-of-domain’’ problem by inferring the answers from
context outside the lesson they belong to.
The evaluation results of the fine-tuned language model on the TQA
dataset are presented in Tables 6 and 7. The performance evaluation of
the Llama-2 model without fine-tuning on CK12-QA examples revealed
accuracy scores of 34.77% and 35.87% on the validation and test
sets for all text questions, respectively. All text questions includes
the non-diagram T/F questions and non-diagram MC questions. This
low zero-shot accuracy emphasizes the need for fine-tuning LLMs on
domain-specific datasets and suggests the model’s limited capability in
accurately answering CK12-QA questions.
While our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of fine-tuning
LLaMA-2 using LoRA, we recognize the importance of evaluating LoRA
hyperparameters such as rank and dropout to further optimize performance, we leave this exploration for future work.
When RAG is integrated without the re-ranker module, the accuracy
notably increased to 83.58% on the validation set and 83.80% on the
test set. This highlights the significant impact of including RAG on the
model’s generative capability without using the re-ranker module.
By omitting RAG, the context in the model’s prompt will be the
complete lesson of the question that it belongs to. This improvement is
demonstrated in the test set results. When both the entire lesson and the
retrieved topics are incorporated as context to our model using RAG,
an accuracy of 83.78% was achieved on the validation set. However,
a slightly lower score of 81.73% was observed on the test set. This
suggests a minor trade-off in generative performance when increasing
the context window size to a limit that may reach or exceed 4096,
which is the maximum window size of Llama-2.
Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the
entire lesson as the context for the model decreased accuracy in both
the validation and test sets. The validation set achieved an accuracy of
80.74%, while the test set obtained an accuracy of 79.22% for all text
questions. This could be a result of feeding the model with unrelated
topics that distract it and worsen the inference process of the model.
We used in this work text-embedding-ada-002 model for retrieval
as it provides balance between accuracy and computational cost. Future work could explore alternative embedding models and advanced
re-ranking strategies to further enhance retrieval quality and its interaction with finetuning.
5.4. Case study
We conducted a qualitative analysis to explore how the addition of
RAG with the fine-tuned LLama-2 improved the model’s performance.
This analysis highlights both the successes and limitations of the model
when it retrieves information from lessons other than the one the question belongs to. The integration of RAG allowed the model to retrieve
relevant context for many questions. We selected two examples from
the CK12-QA dataset to illustrate both the strengths and limitations
of RAG in retrieving relevant information. These examples show how
RAG sometimes succeeded in retrieving the correct context, and other
times failed to provide adequate information for the model to make the
correct inference.
One successful example can be seen in Fig. 8A. In this example,
the model was asked to identify which of the listed options is not
caused by gravity in relation to erosion. The retrieved context discusses
how ‘‘Weathering wears rocks at the Earth’s surface due to different
agents’’. This was useful because it reinforced the understanding that
while glaciers, flowing water, and landslides are all influenced by
gravity, moving air (wind) is not directly driven by gravity in the
context of erosion. Hence, the model correctly selected moving air
as the exception, with the context helping to clarify the relationships
between the agents of erosion and gravity.
However, RAG also revealed limitations when the retrieved context
did not align with the question’s requirements, resulting in incorrect answer. An example of this can be seen in Fig. 8B, the model
with RAG was asked to identify the factors that increase the risk of
landslides, the model incorrectly predicted (D) human activities. The
context mentioned ‘‘Layers of weak rock, such as clay, also allow slopes
to slide’’, which may have led the model to focus more on humaninduced alterations of weak rock layers, rather than recognizing the
role of earthquakes. In this case, the context distracted the model from
identifying the correct answer, resulting in a misprediction. To gain a
deeper understanding of how RAG handled retrieval across different
lessons, we analyzed cases where the model retrieved context from a
lesson other than the one the question originated from.
As shown in Fig. 8C, For the question (NDQ_018937), the model
successfully answered the question by retrieving relevant information
from a different lesson than the one it is in, which ultimately helped
it select the correct answer. This highlights RAG’s ability to synthesize
information across lessons and apply it effectively, which is very important in educational contexts where overlapping concepts between
lessons are common. This capability is especially useful in educational
environments where overlapping concepts are spread across different
lessons.
6. Conclusion
Textbook question answering (TQA) poses a significant challenge
in the field of artificial intelligence (AI) due to the complexity it
brought. The field is evolving rapidly with the introduction of new large
language models (LLMs), fundamentally changing the dynamics of the
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: Configuration Validation accuracy (%) | Unnamed: 0 | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the
Row 1: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 without fine-tuning 34.77 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: entire lesson as the context for the model decreased accuracy in both
Row 2: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 with full lesson context (No RAG) 82.40 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: the validation and test sets. The validation set achieved an accuracy of
Row 3: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 with RAG (No Re-ranker) 83.58 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 4: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 with RAG and full lesson context 83.78 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: 80.74%, while the test set obtained an accuracy of 79.22% for all text
Row 5: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 with RAG + Re-ranker 80.74 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: questions. This could be a result of feeding the model with unrelated
Row 6: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: topics that distract it and worsen the inference process of the model.
Row 7: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: We used in this work text-embedding-ada-002 model for retrieval
Row 8: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): Table 7 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: as it provides balance between accuracy and computational cost. FuRow 9: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): Test accuracy scores for different model configurations. | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 10: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: ture work could explore alternative embedding models and advanced
Row 11: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): Configuration Test accuracy (%) | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 12: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: re-ranking strategies to further enhance retrieval quality and its interRow 13: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 without fine-tuning 35.87 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: action with finetuning.
Row 14: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 with full lesson context (No RAG) 84.24 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 15: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 with RAG (No Re-ranker) 83.80 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 16: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 with RAG and full lesson context 81.73 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: 5.4. Case study
Row 17: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): LLaMA-2 with RAG + Re-ranker 79.22 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 18: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: We conducted a qualitative analysis to explore how the addition of
Row 19: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: RAG with the fine-tuned LLama-2 improved the model’s performance.
Row 20: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: This analysis highlights both the successes and limitations of the model
Row 21: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): with 86.62%, compared to our model’s 83.50%. Our work achieves the | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 22: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: when it retrieves information from lessons other than the one the quesRow 23: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): highest overall accuracy on the test set with 84.24%, outperforming | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 24: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: tion belongs to. The integration of RAG allowed the model to retrieve
Row 25: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): MRHF’s 82.40%. These results prove the strength of our approach | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 26: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: relevant context for many questions. We selected two examples from
Row 27: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): in handling challenging MC questions while maintaining competitive | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 28: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: the CK12-QA dataset to illustrate both the strengths and limitations
Row 29: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): performance across all categories. | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 30: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: of RAG in retrieving relevant information. These examples show how
Row 31: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: RAG sometimes succeeded in retrieving the correct context, and other
Row 32: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): 5.3. Ablation study | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the:
Row 33: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: times failed to provide adequate information for the model to make the
Row 34: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: correct inference.
Row 35: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): By this section, we aim to further understand the impact of RAG | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: One successful example can be seen in Fig. 8A. In this example,
Row 36: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): component on our finetuned model. Before incorporating RAG into our | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: the model was asked to identify which of the listed options is not
Row 37: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): model, we began by analyzing the number of questions in the training | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: caused by gravity in relation to erosion. The retrieved context discusses
Row 38: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): data that require context from lessons other than the ones they belong | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: how ‘‘Weathering wears rocks at the Earth’s surface due to different
Row 39: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): to. We measured the similarity between the questions and the topics | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: agents’’. This was useful because it reinforced the understanding that
Row 40: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): inside lessons by calculating the dot product of the vector-based topics | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: while glaciers, flowing water, and landslides are all influenced by
Row 41: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): stored in a vector database and the question’s vector. Out of the 8653 | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: gravity, moving air (wind) is not directly driven by gravity in the
Row 42: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): samples in the training dataset of non-diagram questions, we found that | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: context of erosion. Hence, the model correctly selected moving air
Row 43: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): only 44% of the questions obtained a retrieved topic from the lesson | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: as the exception, with the context helping to clarify the relationships
Row 44: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): they belong to, leaving the rest with topics from other lessons. | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: between the agents of erosion and gravity.
Row 45: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): When incorporating a re-ranking mechanism, the percentage of | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: However, RAG also revealed limitations when the retrieved context
Row 46: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): questions that obtain answers from the lesson they are in rises to | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: did not align with the question’s requirements, resulting in incorRow 47: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): 52.43%. This analysis shows us the importance of using techniques | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: rect answer. An example of this can be seen in Fig. 8B, the model
Row 48: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): that solve the ‘‘out-of-domain’’ problem by inferring the answers from | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: with RAG was asked to identify the factors that increase the risk of
Row 49: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): context outside the lesson they belong to. | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: landslides, the model incorrectly predicted (D) human activities. The
Row 50: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): The evaluation results of the fine-tuned language model on the TQA | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: context mentioned ‘‘Layers of weak rock, such as clay, also allow slopes
Row 51: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): dataset are presented in Tables 6 and 7. The performance evaluation of | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: to slide’’, which may have led the model to focus more on humanRow 52: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): the Llama-2 model without fine-tuning on CK12-QA examples revealed | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: induced alterations of weak rock layers, rather than recognizing the
Row 53: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): accuracy scores of 34.77% and 35.87% on the validation and test | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: role of earthquakes. In this case, the context distracted the model from
Row 54: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): sets for all text questions, respectively. All text questions includes | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: identifying the correct answer, resulting in a misprediction. To gain a
Row 55: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): the non-diagram T/F questions and non-diagram MC questions. This | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: deeper understanding of how RAG handled retrieval across different
Row 56: Configuration Validation accuracy (%): low zero-shot accuracy emphasizes the need for fine-tuning LLMs on | Unnamed: 0: | Incorporating the re-ranked relative topics using RAG within the: lessons, we analyzed cases where the model retrieved context from a
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
Fig. 8. Case studies illustrating the effectiveness of context retrieval with RAG.
game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing
on the textual challenges and leaving the integration of the visual part
for future work. We rely on recent trends in transfer learning with
the goal of enhancing the reasoning capabilities of TQA systems and,
consequently, improving overall accuracy. Leveraging the immense
potential of LLMs, we specifically adapt the LLM model Llama-2 to the
TQA task through SFT. Additionally, we incorporate the RAG technique
to enhance the quality of text generated by the LLM and tackle the
‘‘out-of-domain’’ problem. One of the primary strengths of our work is
the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to
a significant improvement in answering text-based questions. Specifically, our architecture achieved an accuracy improvement of 4.12% on
the validation set and 9.84% on the test set for textual multiple-choice
questions, including true/false and non-diagram questions. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of combining RAG with LLMs in
tackling the ‘‘out-of-domain’’ problem and ensuring that the model
can retrieve relevant information from textbook content to generate
accurate answers. Our study not only demonstrates the potential of
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=9 index=1]
Columns: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to
Row 1: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing: on the textual challenges and leaving the integration of the visual part | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to: a significant improvement in answering text-based questions. SpecifiRow 2: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing: for future work. We rely on recent trends in transfer learning with | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to: cally, our architecture achieved an accuracy improvement of 4.12% on
Row 3: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing: the goal of enhancing the reasoning capabilities of TQA systems and, | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to: the validation set and 9.84% on the test set for textual multiple-choice
Row 4: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing: consequently, improving overall accuracy. Leveraging the immense | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to: questions, including true/false and non-diagram questions. These reRow 5: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing: potential of LLMs, we specifically adapt the LLM model Llama-2 to the | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to: sults demonstrate the effectiveness of combining RAG with LLMs in
Row 6: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing: TQA task through SFT. Additionally, we incorporate the RAG technique | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to: tackling the ‘‘out-of-domain’’ problem and ensuring that the model
Row 7: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing: to enhance the quality of text generated by the LLM and tackle the | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to: can retrieve relevant information from textbook content to generate
Row 8: game. This paper contributes to the advancement of TQA by focusing: ‘‘out-of-domain’’ problem. One of the primary strengths of our work is | the successful adaptation of LLaMA-2 to the TQA task, which led to: accurate answers. Our study not only demonstrates the potential of
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 10]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
LLMs, such as LLaMA-2, when paired with retrieval mechanisms like
RAG, but also establishes a solid basis for further research in multimodal TQA. While this work contribute to the field of educational
AI systems by improving the textual question-answering process on
textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address
more complex multimodal tasks that incorporate visual parts such as
diagrams and figures. Handling diagram-based tasks requires additional
modifications; therefore, future research will extend our framework
to integrate advanced visual understanding techniques that tackle the
TQA multimodal challenges.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hessa A. Alawwad: Writing – original draft. Areej Alhothali: Supervision. Usman Naseem: Supervision. Ali Alkhathlan: Supervision.
Amani Jamal: Supervision.
Research funding
Author Hessa Alawwad: This project was funded by the Deanship of
Scientific Research (DSR) at King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia, under grant no. (GPIP: 1131-612-2024). The authors, therefore,
acknowledge with thanks DSR for technical and financial support.
Declaration of competing interest
The first author is employed by Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University (IMSIU) and study at King Abdulaziz University, which have
no commercial interest in the research outcomes. Remaining authors
have no conflict of interest to declare.
The authors affirm that these declared interests have not influenced
the design, conduct, analysis, or interpretation of the research presented in this paper. The research was conducted impartially and with
the utmost integrity.
Acknowledgments
This project was funded by the Deanship of Scientific Research
(DSR) at King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, under grant no. (GPIP:
1131-612-2024). The authors, therefore, acknowledge with thanks DSR
for technical and financial support.
Data availability
The data used was described in detail in the paper.
References
[1] Nisha Varghese, M. Punithavalli, Question-answering versus machine reading
comprehension, in: Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval:
Principles and Applications, CRC Press, 2023, p. 209.
[2] Lewis Tunstall, Leandro Von Werra, Thomas Wolf, Natural Language Processing
with Transformers, O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2022.
[3] Daesik Kim, Seonhoon Kim, Nojun Kwak, Textbook question answering
with multi-modal context graph understanding and self-supervised open-set
comprehension, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00232.
[4] Aniruddha Kembhavi, Minjoon Seo, Dustin Schwenk, Jonghyun Choi, Ali Farhadi,
Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Are you smarter than a sixth grader? textbook question
answering for multimodal machine comprehension, in: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 4999–5007.
[5] Eric Horvitz, One hundred year study on artificial intelligence, 2016.
[6] Juzheng Li, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Siyu Wang, Bo Zhang, Textbook question
answering under instructor guidance with memory networks, in: Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp.
3655–3663.
[7] Jose Manuel Gomez-Perez, Raul Ortega, ISAAQ–mastering textbook questions
with pre-trained transformers and bottom-up and top-down attention, 2020,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00562.
[8] OpenAI, et al., GPT-4 technical report, 2023, arXiv:2303.08774.
[9] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi,
Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al., Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models, 2023,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288.
[10] Yiming Tan, Dehai Min, Yu Li, Wenbo Li, Nan Hu, Yongrui Chen, Guilin Qi, Can
ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question
answering performance of the GPT llm family, in: International Semantic Web
Conference, Springer, 2023, pp. 348–367.
[11] Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli,
Ruxandra Cojocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien
Launay, Quentin Malartic, et al., Falcon-40b: an open large language model with
state-of-the-art performance, in: Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL, vol. 2023, 2023, pp. 10755–10773.
[12] Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Bidirectional attention flow for machine comprehension, 2016, arXiv preprint arXiv:
1611.01603.
[13] Yaxian Wang, Bifan Wei, Jun Liu, Qika Lin, Lingling Zhang, Yaqiang Wu, Spatialsemantic collaborative graph network for textbook question answering, IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. (2022).
[14] Fangzhi Xu, Qika Lin, Jun Liu, Lingling Zhang, Tianzhe Zhao, Qi Chai, Yudai Pan,
Yi Huang, Qianying Wang, MoCA: Incorporating domain pretraining and cross
attention for textbook question answering, Pattern Recognit. (ISSN: 0031-3203)
140 (2023) 109588, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2023.109588.
[15] Jie Ma, Jun Liu, Yaxian Wang, Junjun Li, Tongliang Liu, Relation-aware finegrained reasoning network for textbook question answering, IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst. (2021).
[16] Jie Ma, Jun Liu, Qi Chai, Pinghui Wang, Jing Tao, Diagram perception networks
for textbook question answering via joint optimization, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 132
(5) (2024) 1578–1591.
[17] Jie Ma, Qi Chai, Jun Liu, Qingyu Yin, Pinghui Wang, Qinghua Zheng, Xtqa: Spanlevel explanations for textbook question answering, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst. (2023).
[18] Peide Zhu, Zhen Wang, Manabu Okumura, Jie Yang, MRHF: Multi-stage retrieval and hierarchical fusion for textbook question answering, in: International
Conference on Multimedia Modeling, Springer, 2024, pp. 98–111.
[19] Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Reading wikipedia to
answer open-domain questions, 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00051.
[20] Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, Mingwei Chang, Retrieval augmented language model pre-training, in: International Conference on
Machine Learning, PMLR, 2020, pp. 3929–3938.
[21] Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Kristina Toutanova, Latent retrieval for weakly
supervised open domain question answering, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.
00300.
[22] Yair Feldman, Ran El-Yaniv, Multi-hop paragraph retrieval for open-domain
question answering, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06606.
[23] Nils Reimers, Semantic search, 2022.
[24] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir
Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim
Rocktäschel, et al., Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
tasks, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33 (2020) 9459–9474.
[25] Xiaozhong Lyu, Stefan Grafberger, Samantha Biegel, Shaopeng Wei, Meng Cao,
Sebastian Schelter, Ce Zhang, Improving retrieval-augmented large language
models via data importance learning, 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03027.
[26] Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo
Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, Edouard Grave, Fewshot learning with retrieval augmented language models, 2022, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.03299.
[27] David Soong, Sriram Sridhar, Han Si, Jan-Samuel Wagner, Ana Caroline Costa
Sá, Christina Y Yu, Kubra Karagoz, Meijian Guan, Sanyam Kumar, Hisham
Hamadeh, et al., Improving accuracy of GPT-3/4 results on biomedical data
using a retrieval-augmented language model, PLoS Digit. Health 3 (8) (2024)
e0000568.
[28] Jie Ma, Qi Chai, Jingyue Huang, Jun Liu, Yang You, Qinghua Zheng, Weakly
supervised learning for textbook question answering, IEEE Trans. Image Process.
31 (2022) 7378–7388.
[29] Aman Chadha, Autoregressive vs. Autoencoder models, Distill. AI (2020) https:
//aman.ai.
[30] Jeremy Howard, Sebastian Ruder, Universal language model fine-tuning for text
classification, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06146.
[31] Tianyu Gao, Prompting: Better ways of using language models for nlp tasks, The
Gradient (2021).
[32] Laria Reynolds, Kyle McDonell, Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the few-shot paradigm, in: Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[33] ANTHONY ROBINS, Catastrophic forgetting, rehearsal and pseudorehearsal,
Connect. Sci. 7 (2) (1995) 123–146.
[34] Huggingface, Supervised Fine-tuning Trainer.
[35] Sourab Mangrulkar, Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre Debut, Younes Belkada, Sayak
Paul, Benjamin Bossan, PEFT: State-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning
methods, 2022, https://github.com/huggingface/peft.
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=10 index=1]
Columns: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question
Row 1: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: more complex multimodal tasks that incorporate visual parts such as | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: answering performance of the GPT llm family, in: International Semantic Web
Row 2: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: diagrams and figures. Handling diagram-based tasks requires additional | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Conference, Springer, 2023, pp. 348–367.
Row 3: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [11] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli,
Row 4: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: modifications; therefore, future research will extend our framework | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Ruxandra Cojocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien
Row 5: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: to integrate advanced visual understanding techniques that tackle the | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Launay, Quentin Malartic, et al., Falcon-40b: an open large language model with
Row 6: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: TQA multimodal challenges. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: state-of-the-art performance, in: Findings of the Association for Computational
Row 7: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Linguistics: ACL, vol. 2023, 2023, pp. 10755–10773.
Row 8: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Bidirec-CRediT authorship contribution statement[12] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question:
Row 9: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: tional attention flow for machine comprehension, 2016, arXiv preprint arXiv:
Row 10: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: 1611.01603.
Row 11: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Hessa A. Alawwad: Writing – original draft. Areej Alhothali: Su- [13] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Yaxian Wang, Bifan Wei, Jun Liu, Qika Lin, Lingling Zhang, Yaqiang Wu, SpatialRow 12: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: pervision. Usman Naseem: Supervision. Ali Alkhathlan: Supervision. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: semantic collaborative graph network for textbook question answering, IEEE
Row 13: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Amani Jamal: Supervision. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. (2022).
Row 14: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [14] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Fangzhi Xu, Qika Lin, Jun Liu, Lingling Zhang, Tianzhe Zhao, Qi Chai, Yudai Pan,
Row 15: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Yi Huang, Qianying Wang, MoCA: Incorporating domain pretraining and cross
Row 16: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Research funding | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: attention for textbook question answering, Pattern Recognit. (ISSN: 0031-3203)
Row 17: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: 140 (2023) 109588, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2023.109588.
Row 18: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Author Hessa Alawwad: This project was funded by the Deanship of [15] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Jie Ma, Jun Liu, Yaxian Wang, Junjun Li, Tongliang Liu, Relation-aware fineRow 19: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Scientific Research (DSR) at King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: grained reasoning network for textbook question answering, IEEE Trans. Neural
Row 20: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Netw. Learn. Syst. (2021).
Row 21: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Arabia, under grant no. (GPIP: 1131-612-2024). The authors, therefore, | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question:
Row 22: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [16] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Jie Ma, Jun Liu, Qi Chai, Pinghui Wang, Jing Tao, Diagram perception networks
Row 23: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: acknowledge with thanks DSR for technical and financial support. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: for textbook question answering via joint optimization, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 132
Row 24: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: (5) (2024) 1578–1591.
Row 25: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Declaration of competing interest [17] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Jie Ma, Qi Chai, Jun Liu, Qingyu Yin, Pinghui Wang, Qinghua Zheng, Xtqa: SpanRow 26: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: level explanations for textbook question answering, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Row 27: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Learn. Syst. (2023).
Row 28: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: The first author is employed by Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question:
Row 29: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [18] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Peide Zhu, Zhen Wang, Manabu Okumura, Jie Yang, MRHF: Multi-stage reRow 30: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: University (IMSIU) and study at King Abdulaziz University, which have | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: trieval and hierarchical fusion for textbook question answering, in: International
Row 31: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: no commercial interest in the research outcomes. Remaining authors | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Conference on Multimedia Modeling, Springer, 2024, pp. 98–111.
Row 32: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: have no conflict of interest to declare. [19] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Reading wikipedia to
Row 33: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: answer open-domain questions, 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00051.
Row 34: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: The authors affirm that these declared interests have not influenced | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question:
Row 35: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [20] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, Mingwei Chang, ReRow 36: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: the design, conduct, analysis, or interpretation of the research pre- | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: trieval augmented language model pre-training, in: International Conference on
Row 37: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: sented in this paper. The research was conducted impartially and with | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Machine Learning, PMLR, 2020, pp. 3929–3938.
Row 38: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: the utmost integrity. [21] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Kristina Toutanova, Latent retrieval for weakly
Row 39: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: supervised open domain question answering, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.
Row 40: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: 00300.
Row 41: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Acknowledgments | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question:
Row 42: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [22] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Yair Feldman, Ran El-Yaniv, Multi-hop paragraph retrieval for open-domain
Row 43: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: question answering, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06606.
Row 44: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: This project was funded by the Deanship of Scientific Research [23] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Nils Reimers, Semantic search, 2022.
Row 45: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: (DSR) at King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, under grant no. (GPIP: [24] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir
Row 46: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: 1131-612-2024). The authors, therefore, acknowledge with thanks DSR | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim
Row 47: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Rocktäschel, et al., Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
Row 48: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: for technical and financial support. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: tasks, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33 (2020) 9459–9474.
Row 49: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [25] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Xiaozhong Lyu, Stefan Grafberger, Samantha Biegel, Shaopeng Wei, Meng Cao,
Row 50: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Data availability | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Sebastian Schelter, Ce Zhang, Improving retrieval-augmented large language
Row 51: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: models via data importance learning, 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03027.
Row 52: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [26] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo
Row 53: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: The data used was described in detail in the paper. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, Edouard Grave, FewRow 54: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: shot learning with retrieval augmented language models, 2022, arXiv preprint
Row 55: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: arXiv:2208.03299.
Row 56: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: References [27] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: David Soong, Sriram Sridhar, Han Si, Jan-Samuel Wagner, Ana Caroline Costa
Row 57: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Sá, Christina Y Yu, Kubra Karagoz, Meijian Guan, Sanyam Kumar, Hisham
Row 58: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [1] Nisha Varghese, M. Punithavalli, Question-answering versus machine reading | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Hamadeh, et al., Improving accuracy of GPT-3/4 results on biomedical data
Row 59: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: comprehension, in: Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval: | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: using a retrieval-augmented language model, PLoS Digit. Health 3 (8) (2024)
Row 60: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Principles and Applications, CRC Press, 2023, p. 209. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: e0000568.
Row 61: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [2] Lewis Tunstall, Leandro Von Werra, Thomas Wolf, Natural Language Processing [28] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Jie Ma, Qi Chai, Jingyue Huang, Jun Liu, Yang You, Qinghua Zheng, Weakly
Row 62: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: with Transformers, O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2022. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: supervised learning for textbook question answering, IEEE Trans. Image Process.
Row 63: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [3] Daesik Kim, Seonhoon Kim, Nojun Kwak, Textbook question answering | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: 31 (2022) 7378–7388.
Row 64: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: with multi-modal context graph understanding and self-supervised open-set [29] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Aman Chadha, Autoregressive vs. Autoencoder models, Distill. AI (2020) https:
Row 65: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: comprehension, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00232. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: //aman.ai.
Row 66: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [4] Aniruddha Kembhavi, Minjoon Seo, Dustin Schwenk, Jonghyun Choi, Ali Farhadi, [30] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Jeremy Howard, Sebastian Ruder, Universal language model fine-tuning for text
Row 67: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Are you smarter than a sixth grader? textbook question | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: classification, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06146.
Row 68: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: answering for multimodal machine comprehension, in: Proceedings of the IEEE [31] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Tianyu Gao, Prompting: Better ways of using language models for nlp tasks, The
Row 69: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 4999–5007. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Gradient (2021).
Row 70: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [5] Eric Horvitz, One hundred year study on artificial intelligence, 2016. [32] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Laria Reynolds, Kyle McDonell, Prompt programming for large language modRow 71: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [6] Juzheng Li, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Siyu Wang, Bo Zhang, Textbook question | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: els: Beyond the few-shot paradigm, in: Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI
Row 72: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: answering under instructor guidance with memory networks, in: Proceedings | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2021, pp. 1–7.
Row 73: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. [33] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: ANTHONY ROBINS, Catastrophic forgetting, rehearsal and pseudorehearsal,
Row 74: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: 3655–3663. | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Connect. Sci. 7 (2) (1995) 123–146.
Row 75: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: [7] Jose Manuel Gomez-Perez, Raul Ortega, ISAAQ–mastering textbook questions [34] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Huggingface, Supervised Fine-tuning Trainer.
Row 76: textual TQA as a foundational base, we recognize the need to address: with pre-trained transformers and bottom-up and top-down attention, 2020, [35] | ChatGPT replace traditional KBQA models? An in-depth analysis of the question: Sourab Mangrulkar, Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre Debut, Younes Belkada, Sayak
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 11]
H.A. Alawwad et al.
[36] Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit
matrix multiplication for transformers at scale, 2022, arXiv:2208.07339.
[37] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean
Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language
models, 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685.
[38] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, Illia Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30 (2017).
[39] Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, Luke Zettlemoyer, Qlora:
Efficient finetuning of quantized llms, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36 (2024).
[40] Daniel Khashabi, Sewon Min, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord,
Peter Clark, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Unifiedqa: Crossing format boundaries with a
single qa system, 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00700.
[41] Juzheng Li, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Bo Zhang, Essay-anchor attentive multi-modal
bilinear pooling for textbook question answering, in: 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Multimedia and Expo, ICME, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,
Textbook question answering with multi-type question learning and contextualized diagram representation, in: Artificial Neural Networks and Machine
Learning–ICANN 2021: 30th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Bratislava, Slovakia, September 14–17, 2021, Proceedings, Part IV 30,
Springer, 2021, pp. 86–98.
[43] Yaxian Wang, Jun Liu, Jie Ma, Hongwei Zeng, Lingling Zhang, Junjun Li,
Dynamic dual graph networks for textbook question answering, Pattern Recognit.
139 (2023) 109441.
Hessa Abdulrahman AlAwwad specialize in the field of Computer Science, with a
keen interest in cutting-edge technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Natural
Language Processing (NLP), and Computer Vision (CV). Her current passion lies in the
exciting realm of multimodal question answering, where he explore the intersection
of AI, NLP, and CV to tackle complex challenges in understanding and responding to
questions involving multiple types of data. Her work is driven by a relentless curiosity
and a commitment to advancing the frontiers of knowledge in these domains.
Pattern Recognition 162 (2025) 111332

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: [36] | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,
Row 1: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: matrix multiplication for transformers at scale, 2022, arXiv:2208.07339. | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: Textbook question answering with multi-type question learning and contexRow 2: [36]: [37] | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: tualized diagram representation, in: Artificial Neural Networks and Machine
Row 3: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: Learning–ICANN 2021: 30th International Conference on Artificial Neural NetRow 4: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: models, 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685. | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: works, Bratislava, Slovakia, September 14–17, 2021, Proceedings, Part IV 30,
Row 5: [36]: [38] | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: Springer, 2021, pp. 86–98.
Row 6: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, Illia Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, Adv. | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: [43] Yaxian Wang, Jun Liu, Jie Ma, Hongwei Zeng, Lingling Zhang, Junjun Li,
Row 7: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30 (2017). | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: Dynamic dual graph networks for textbook question answering, Pattern Recognit.
Row 8: [36]: [39] | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, Luke Zettlemoyer, Qlora: | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: 139 (2023) 109441.
Row 9: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36 (2024). | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,:
Row 10: [36]: [40] | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Daniel Khashabi, Sewon Min, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord, | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,:
Row 11: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Peter Clark, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Unifiedqa: Crossing format boundaries with a | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: Hessa Abdulrahman AlAwwad specialize in the field of Computer Science, with a
Row 12: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: single qa system, 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00700. | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: keen interest in cutting-edge technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Natural
Row 13: [36]: [41] | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: Juzheng Li, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Bo Zhang, Essay-anchor attentive multi-modal | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: Language Processing (NLP), and Computer Vision (CV). Her current passion lies in the
Row 14: [36]: | Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, Luke Zettlemoyer, LLM.int8(): 8-bit: bilinear pooling for textbook question answering, in: 2018 IEEE International | [42] Jianwei He, Xianghua Fu, Zi Long, Shuxin Wang, Chaojie Liang, Hongbin Lin,: exciting realm of multimodal question answering, where he explore the intersection
[/TABLE]