[PAGE 1]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and
Challenges
JIAJIA WANG,School of Sciences, Henan University of Technology, China
JIMMY X. HUANG∗, Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management Research Lab, York University, Canada
XINHUI TU, School of Computer Science, Central China Normal University, China
JUNMEI WANG,School of Computer, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
ANGELA J. HUANG, Lassonde School of Engineering, York University, Canada
MD TAHMID RAHMAN LASKAR, York University & Dialpad Inc., Canada
AMRAN BHUIYAN, Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management Research Lab, York University, Canada
Recent years have witnessed a substantial increase in the use of deep learning to solve various natural language processing (NLP)
problems. Early deep learning models were constrained by their sequential or unidirectional nature, such that they struggled to capture
the contextual relationships across text inputs. The introduction of bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT)
leads to a robust encoder for the transformer model that can understand the broader context and deliver state-of-the-art performance
across various NLP tasks. This has inspired researchers and practitioners to apply BERT to practical problems, such as information
retrieval (IR). A survey that focuses on a comprehensive analysis of prevalent approaches that apply pretrained transformer encoders
like BERT to IR can thus be useful for academia and the industry. In light of this, we revisit a variety of BERT-based methods in
this survey, cover a wide range of techniques of IR, and group them into six high-level categories: (i) handling long documents, (ii)
integrating semantic information, (iii) balancing effectiveness and efficiency, (iv) predicting the weights of terms, (v) query expansion,
and (vi) document expansion. We also provide links to resources, including datasets and toolkits, for BERT-based IR systems. A key
highlight of our survey is the comparison between BERT’s encoder-based models and the latest generative Large Language Models
(LLMs), such as ChatGPT, which rely on decoders. Despite the popularity of LLMs, we find that for specific tasks, finely tuned BERT
encoders still outperform, and at a lower deployment cost. Finally, we summarize the comprehensive outcomes of the survey and
suggest directions for future research in the area.
CCS Concepts: •Information systems → Information retrieval;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: BERT, Information Retrieval, Natural Language Processing, Artificial Intelligence
∗Corresponding author: Jimmy X. Huang (jhuang@yorku.ca)
Authors’ addresses: Jiajia Wang, School of Sciences, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China; Jimmy X. Huang, Information
Retrieval and Knowledge Management Research Lab, York University, Toronto, Canada; Xinhui Tu, School of Computer Science, Central China Normal
University, Wuhan, China; Junmei Wang, School of Computer, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China; Angela J. Huang, Lassonde School
of Engineering, York University , Toronto, Canada; Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, York University & Dialpad Inc., Toronto, Canada; Amran Bhuiyan,
Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management Research Lab, York University, Toronto, Canada.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2024 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM 1
arXiv:2403.00784v1 [cs.IR] 18 Feb 2024

[PAGE 2]
2 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
ACM Reference Format:
Jiajia Wang, Jimmy X. Huang, Xinhui Tu, Junmei Wang, Angela J. Huang, Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, and Amran Bhuiyan. 2024.
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges. 1, 1 (March 2024), 33 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Information retrieval (IR) is the acquisition of informational resources from a large volume of unstructured
information that satisfies the user’s needs [37]. Web search engines are a typical example of an information retrieval
system. IR models are used to sort and rank the retrieved documents according to the user’s queries, this is essential
for designing search engines. Traditional IR models include the 𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 , the 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 , and the
𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑢𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 . In 1959, Arthur Samuel introduced the term 𝑚𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒 𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 as a method of data analysis that
automates the building of an analytical model. Machine learning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence (AI) based on the
idea that the system can learn from data, identify patterns, and make decisions with minimal human intervention.
Learning to rank (LTR) is an approach that involves utilizing machine learning techniques to construct ranking
models. Unlike traditional and manually constructed ranking formulae, LTR uses data to automatically build a model
that can make predictions without being explicitly programmed to do so. While it delivers superior performance to
traditional IR models, its capabilities can be further enhanced in two areas. First, the complexity and diversity of
languages and cultures make it challenging to accurately comprehend semantic information embedded within queries
and document content. Second, feature engineering is manually performed in machine learning, and requires input
from domain experts, where this incurs a significant cost.
Deep learning is a domain of machine learning that uses artificial neural networks with multiple layers to learn
patterns from the given data. It has significantly outperformed traditional machine learning models in recent years to
become the focus of AI research. Deep learning has exhibited an impressive capability in a wide range of tasks, such as
speech recognition [32], natural language processing [28], recommender systems [119], and computer vision [8]. For
more information on deep neural networks, we refer the interested reader to [127] and [7].
In early research in the area, vectors of word embedding like word2vec1 [122] and GloVe2[51] were used in neural
network models to obtain the representation of the words in the input texts. Word2vec uses one of the following two
models to this end: the (i) continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) model or the (ii) continuous skip-gram model. The CBOW
model predicts a given word according to the words surrounding it within a fixed window, where the order of the
surrounding words does not impact the results of its predictions. By contrast, a continuous skip-gram predicts the
surrounding words in a fixed window based on the given word. This causes the nearby contextual words to have a more
significant influence on the predicted word than the contextual words that are more distant. GloVe is a tool for word
representation based on global term frequency. The word representations generated by GloVe capture some semantic
information between words. However, neither word2vec nor GloVe can adequately capture contextual information.
Contextualized information refers to the intelligence within the given discourse that exploits the relationships between
the words, phrases, sentences, and even paragraphs by considering all the circumstances (e.g., bidirectional contexts)
involved in the emergence of the text. For example, the word bank appears in bank account and bank of the river . If a
model generates the same representation for bank in both scenarios, this means that it does not capture the contextual
1https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/models/word2vec.html
2https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 3]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 3
information. A context-based model can generate different representations for bank based on the words preceding and
following it (i.e., bidirectional contextual information) in the sentence.
Considering the importance of bidirectional contextual information, Devlin et al. proposed Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers (BERT) [ 44] in 2018. It leverages the transformer encoder [ 12] to pretrain a
bidirectional language model. BERT has demonstrated an impressive capability in terms of understanding language in
various NLP tasks: (i) It outperformed previously proposed language models [10, 73] on the GLUE [13] benchmark,
and delivered state-of-the-art performance on tasks like natural language inference, textual entailment, sentiment
analysis, and sentence similarity modeling. (ii) It demonstrated impressive comprehension on the SQuAD v1.1 test set
by outperforming even humans on two measures of evaluation (ExactMatch (EM) and the F1 score). (iii) BERT has a
good capacity for transfer learning [80, 91, 145] that helps it adapt to different tasks through pretraining or fine-tuning.
The successful use of BERT in various applications involving language comprehension has also inspired researchers
to apply BERT-based approaches to IR [9, 78, 82, 108, 121]. In light of the recent successes of BERT-based models in
IR, and given the significant number of studies in this domain, we provide a survey in this study that brings together
a number of BERT-based approaches into a coherent resource that provides a single point reference for research on
IR. Note that few surveys [21, 47, 61] in the literature have highlighted neural approaches to IR. For instance, Onal et
al. [61] focused on the fundamentals of text information retrieval, while Mitra et al. [21] presented a brief review of
IR methods that use pretrained embeddings and neural networks. Closer to our work here, Guo et al. [47] surveyed
IR approaches that focus only on ranking models using deep neural networks. Unlike these approaches, our survey
targets IR approaches that utilize pretrained transformer encoders like BERT and its variants while also systematically
reviewing the challenges of using BERT-based models for IR.
Since 2022, there has been remarkable progress in leveraging Language Models (LMs), encompassing Pretrained
Language Models (PLMs) and Large Language Models (LLMs). PLMs such as BERT [ 44], RoBERTa [141], and GPT
[10] undergo pretraining on extensive textual corpora to assimilate worldly knowledge. The recent advent of LLMs,
exemplified by OpenAI’s ChatGPT [81] and GPT-4 [88], has catalyzed an unforeseen surge in innovation, highlighting
the diverse possibilities of AI.
While decoder-only LLMs like ChatGPT3 [81] have gained significant attention for their ability to generate humanlike text, there remain many challenges in using LLMs in real-world problems. For instance, they require significant
computational resources for both training and inference. In addition, they can generate responses based only on their
pretraining knowledge, but cannot answer any time-sensitive questions that are beyond their pretraining timeline.
Moreover, using LLMs as a service by utilizing their APIs poses privacy-related concerns. Considering their cost, failure
to adapt over time, and privacy-related issues, it is challenging to use such LLMs in real-world applications. As an
alternative, encoder-based transformer models like BERT do not pose privacy-related risks and require significantly
lower computational resources. BERT-based models are particularly adept at information retrieval tasks [30] that are
crucial for applications like search engines and recommendation systems owing to their effective semantic understanding,
low computational requirements, and efficient response times. BERT-based rich contextual embeddings are useful for
retrieving information from external resources to augment the context of the LLM during inference [89]. In this regard,
we aim to review the use of pretrained transformer encoder models like BERT in IR. This can help fill a gap in the
relevant research, and can provide a comprehensive overview for researchers and industry professionals.
3https://chat.openai.com/
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 4]
4 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
The major contributions of this survey in this context are four-fold. First, we logically organize the aspects of
BERT for ad-hoc IR in terms of the updated literature. This enables the reader to understand BERT-related models from
various perspectives in a step-by-step manner and discover new research opportunities by following this organization.
Second, we analyze the advantages and disadvantages of different models based on BERT, and conduct a number of
state-of-the-art comparisons in different categories. Third, we present the challenges to the use of BERT for IR and
examine important IR toolkits. Finally, we provide comprehensive conclusions based on the outcomes of the survey and
outline the trend of future research on BERT-based IR.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: We discuss the background and structure of BERT in Section 2.
Section 3 discusses the use of BERT for ad-hoc IR, including utilizing BERT for handling long documents, utilizing
BERT for integrating semantic information, BERT for balancing effectiveness and efficiency, BERT-based term weight
prediction, BERT-based query expansion, and BERT-based document expansion, respectively. In Section 4, we present
resources that incorporate datasets as well as BERT-based ranking models. Finally, we provide the conclusions of this
survey in Section 5.
2 BACKGROUND
The popularization of the Web and the explosive growth of Internet-based information have led researchers to
focus on the performance and efficiency of IR systems as well as the technology of their core search engines. In addition
to crawling and indexing in the pipeline, the most important factor while designing a search engine is ranking, which
relies solely on IR models for sorting the relevant documents with respect to a user’s query. Thus, the efficiency of a
search engine heavily relies on the efficiency of the IR model.
Relevance-based ranking is the main problem in IR that plays a fundamental role in various applications of
it, such as search engines. To satisfy the user’s informational needs (queries), we need to identify the collection of
documents that is the most relevant to their queries. Given a set of queries 𝑄 = {𝑞1, 𝑞2, . . . , 𝑞𝑚 } and a set of documents
𝐷 = {𝑑1, 𝑑2, . . . , 𝑑𝑛 }, we need to use an IR model to rank the relevant documents based on search queries.
In this section, we discuss the most popular traditional IR models in Section 2.1, neural ranking models In
Section 2.2, pretrained language models in Section 2.3, and improvements and extensions of pretrained language models
in Section 2.4.
2.1 Traditional Retrieval Models
Traditional retrieval models can be divided into four categories: Boolean models, vector space models, language
models, and probability models. The first three models assume that documents and queries are composed of a set of
words and ignore the positional information of tokens in a given query/document.
The Boolean model [6, 34] is a simple retrieval model based on set theory and Boolean algebra. It aims to find
documents that return “1" with a query term. However, it lacks the concept of document rank, which limits its retrieval
capabilities. Salton et al. introduced a non-binary weight model called the 𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 (VSM) [33] to rank the
relevant documents based on search queries. The VSM [33] transforms text processing into vector computation in vector
space, presents semantic similarity through spatial similarity, and thus compensates for the Boolean model’s inability
to scale the returned documents. However, approaches based on the VSM model fail to recognize semantic ambiguity
in the text due to their dependence on token frequency, and cannot solve the problems of polysemy and synonymy.
The BM25 probabilistic model [115] is among the best weighting models for IR [16, 27, 54–56, 59, 60, 95, 135, 140]. It
assigns a weight to a search term based on its intra-document term frequency and query term frequency. The document
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 5]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 5
weight is the sum of the weights of the query term. Ponte et al. [53] proposed a language model that considers a passage
of natural language text as a discrete time series. They utilized probabilistic models to estimate the probability of a
document being relevant based directly on a particular probability distribution and a language model to predict the
probability of a given sequence of words occurring in a sentence.
2.2 Neural Ranking Models
Traditional retrieval models obtain ranking scores by searching for exact matches of words in both the query and
the document. However, this limits the availability of positional and semantic information and may lead to 𝑣𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑦
𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ [126]. By contrast, neural ranking models construct query-to-document relevance structures to learn feature
representations automatically via word2vec [122] and GloVe [51]. There are two main classes of neural ranking models:
representation-focused models and interaction-focused models.
• Representation−focused Architecture: This architecture encodes the query and the document separately. Thus,
no interaction occurs between the query and the document during the encoding procedure. Following this pipeline,
Huang et al. introduced the deep structured semantic model (DSSM) [ 90] that can predict the semantic similarity
between sentences and obtain a lower-dimensional semantic vector representation of a sentence. Similarly, Hu et al. in
2014 studied two models for text matching [17], Architecture I (ARC-I) and ARC-II. The ARC-I model uses a convolutional
neural network (CNN) to separately obtain features from texts and calculate the similarities between the features.
However, there is no interaction between the texts while the features are extracted.
• Interaction−focused Architecture: This architecture evaluates the relationship between a query and a document
according to their interaction. Compared with representation-focused architecture, interaction-focused architecture can
capture more contextualized information. Hu et al. proposed the ARC − II model [17], which uses a 1D convolutional
layer to explore the interaction between input texts. The DRMM [46], introduced by Guo et al., uses a histogram to
map the relevance between the query and words in the document. Wan et al. proposed Match SRNN [117], which
models complex interactions between input texts by using a neural tensor layer. Xiong et al. proposed KNRM [18],
which uses a kernel pooling layer to calculate the relevance between the query and words in the document. Dai et al.
introduced Conv-KNRM [150], a model for the soft matching of n-grams for ad-hoc IR by using a CNN. Although all
these approaches improve performance over a range of IR applications, they fail to consistently work well when trained
on small-scale data.
2.3 Pretrained Language Models
Creating a better language model is crucial to NLP. In the broad sense, a pretrained language model refers to a
language model trained on large-scale data, including distributed static representation-based models (word2vec [122]
and GloVe [51]) and dynamic contextualized models (CoVe [ 19] and ELMo [ 73]). Following the new wave of deep
transformer-focused pretrained models [10], such as the generative pretrained transformer (GPT) [10] developed by
OpenAI, a new understanding of the pretrained language model, known as BERT [44], emerged in the NLP community
in 2018. Compared with previous models [ 17, 18, 90, 150], pretrained models based on deep transformer encoders
have the advantage of being able to process input text sequences in parallel. In addition, transformer encoder-based
pretrained language models can focus on the target task and fine-tune it to achieve better performance than the
previously mentioned models [17, 18, 90, 150], where the representation of word vectors remains constant when used
as an additional input to perform the target task.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 6]
6 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
Fig. 1. The pretraining model architectures of BERT, OpenAI GPT, and ELMo. BERT demonstrates a significant bidirectional nature,
OpenAI’s GPT exhibits a unidirectional characteristic, while ELMo uses a shallow bidirectional approach.
A comparison of pretrained transformer models reveals that the GPT model from OpenAI uses a multi-layer
decoder based on a transformer. It is mainly composed of two parts: generative pretraining and differential fine-tuning.
Unlike the GPT, BERT does not leverage the decoder of the transformer for self-regression language modeling. Instead,
it introduces the auto-encoding pretraining task. In contrast to ELMo, which uses the left-to-right and right-to-left
LSTM models, BERT uses the bidirectional transformer encoder as the language model, and takes the masked language
model (MLM) and next sentence prediction (NSP) as the objectives of pretraining. Figure 1 shows a comparison of
ELMo, OpenAI GPT, and BERT.
2.4 Improvements to and Extensions of Pretrained Language Models
The advantage of BERT’s auto-encoding language model is that it can use contextualized information on the given
word to better predict its vector representation. Because BERT has pioneered a new area of NLP, many variants and
extensions based on it have emerged.
Yang et al. introduced XLNET [155] in 2019. It is an auto-regressive language model based on Transformer-XL [146],
in which all tokens are predicted in random order, rather than sequentially, and the joint probability of each predicted
token is factorized by using the product rule to address the issue of a discrepancy between pretraining and fine-tuning
in BERT due to the use of artificial symbols like [MASK]. In addition, XLNET incorporates the advantages of the
auto-encoding language model, and obtains contextualized information by introducing the permutation language model
and two-stream self-attention. Shortly after XLNET overtook BERT across the board, Facebook proposed RoBERTa [141],
which stands for the Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach, which can achieve state-of-the-art performance
on multiple tasks. RoBERTa does not change the structure of Google’s BERT but only its method of pretraining. The
changes in the pretraining methods are mainly reflected in the following aspects: (1) Static masking vs. dynamic masking:
In static masking, the masking operation is performed only once during data processing while in dynamic masking, the
pattern of masking changes whenever a sequence is fed into the model. (2) With Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) vs.
without NSP (Removing the NSP from RoBERTa’s training procedure enables the input to be packed with full sentences
sampled from different documents until the maximum length of the sequence is 512; this is called FULL-SENTENCES).
(3) A larger mini-batch. (4) More training data and a longer training time.
As with BERT, XLNET and RoBERTa encounter the issue of consistent growth in the size of the pretrained language
model that leads to memory-related constraints, a longer preparation time, and unexpectedly poor performance. To
reduce memory consumption and improve the speed of training of the model, Lan et al. [ 151] proposed ALBERT,
which incorporates two parameter-reduction techniques: word vector decomposition and cross-layer parameter sharing.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 7]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 7
Pretraining in XLNET and RoBERTa by using NSP is simple and thus cannot be used to learn deep semantic information.
ALBERT replaces it with sentence-order prediction (SOP) to predict if the sentences are coherent. Different from the
above-mentioned pretrained models, Clark et al. proposed ELECTRA [62] that combines BERT with a structure similar
to that of the generative adversarial network (GAN) [42]. ELECTRA consists of a generator and a discriminator and can
outperform BERT while using fewer parameters and data to achieve results comparable to those of the SOTA model
RoBERTa while using only a quarter of the number of calculations.
To test the validity of pretraining models across languages, Cui et al. presented MacBERT [ 138] (MLM as a
correction) model as a pretrained model. The model improves RoBERTa from several aspects, such as reducing the gap
between the pretraining and the fine-tuning phases by masking similar words. It also replaces the NSP pretraining task
with the SOP in ALBERT. In addition, BERT has been pretrained on biomedical [48] and clinical [29] data to achieve
state-of-the-art performance across biomedical tasks [43].
To balance efficiency and effectiveness, Hofstätter et al. proposed the transformer–kernel (TK) model [105, 106]
that improves the architecture of the KNRM [18]. The TK model encodes queries and documents independently by
using a small number of transformer layers (up to three) before kernel pooling to obtain an optimal ratio between
effectiveness and efficiency. Hofstätter et al. also proposed the TK model with local attention (TKL) [107], which uses
local self-attention rather than the self-attention of the encoder of the transformer to perform pooling over windows of
document terms via a modified KNRM.
The above-mentioned pretrained language models require different training and fine-tuning phases to adapt to
different tasks. By contrast, Raffel et al. introduced a unified architecture, T5 (text-to-text transfer transformer) [25],
that converts all NLP tasks into text-to-text tasks. T5 uses more hyperparameters and training data than BERT, but
allows for the direct use of the same model, objective, training process, and decoding process for every task. However,
T5 is a mere combination of BERT and GPT in which the correlation between the encoder and the decoder enables
contextualized output embedding as well as a self-attention mechanism that allows each word to attend differently to
inputs based on different attention mechanisms.
More recently, transformer decoder-based generative language models, such as GPT-3 [120], ChatGPT [81], GPT-4
[88], PaLM [4, 96], and LLaMA [38, 39], have drawn considerable attention owing to their impressive capability to
solve a wide range of tasks without requiring any task-specific fine-tuning. These decoder-based auto-regressive large
transformer language models are pretrained on a large amount of self-supervised data, followed by the use of techniques
of alignment, like reinforcement learning, based on human feedback to generate human-like responses. Although these
LLMs have demonstrated impressive zero-shot performance, using them in real-world scenarios is challenging due to
their consumption of a large amount of computational resources even during inference. Moreover, they can generate
responses based only on their pretraining knowledge. This means that they cannot access any information beyond their
pretraining timeline. To address these limitations, retrieval-augmented generation has drawn a considerable amount of
interest [89]. In this approach, LLMs can retrieve information from external corpora to augment the context of the
input. This helps them effectively answer even time-sensitive queries. Specifically, external knowledge bases store
vector embeddings of different documents. Thus, for a given query, the most relevant documents are retrieved based on
the similarity between the query embedding and the document embeddings. Due to their effectiveness, embeddings
generated by BERT-based models are widely used to retrieve the relevant information via vector similarity.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 8]
8 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
Fig. 2. The input representation of BERT consists of three parts: token embeddings, segment embeddings, and position embeddings.
The special token [CLS] is always the first token in every sequence, and the special token [SEP] separates two sentences in it [44]
.
The relationship between RoBERTa [141], ALBERT [151], ELECTRA [62], MacBERT [138], TK [105, 106], and T5
[25], and the original BERT model [44] suggests that all these models are simply modified versions of the original BERT
with adjustable objectives. We called these variants BERT-based models/approaches.
3 BERT FOR AD-HOC IR AND CHALLENGES
This section provides a comprehensive survey of state-of-the-art pretrained transformer encoders (i.e., BERT-based
approaches) for the application of ad-hoc IR and the challenges to them. As BERT is the pioneer in pretrained transformer
encoder models, we first briefly present the BERT model introduced by Devlin et al. [44] in Section 3.1. For the purpose
of analysis, all BERT-based IR approaches are divided into several categories, and the challenges to each are presented
in Sections 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4. Section 3.2 provides a comprehensive overview of BERT-based approaches that handle long
documents. Considering the importance of integrating semantic information, Section 3.3 reviews recent BERT-based
approaches from different perspectives on contextualization, namely, methods of aggregating long documents, ranking
strategies, and weak supervision, in Section 3.3.1, Section 3.3.2, and Section 3.3.3, respectively. We then provide a
comparative analysis of these perspectives in Section 3.3.4. Section 3.4 surveys BERT-based approaches that deal with
effectiveness and efficiency by focusing on two aspects: reducing the duration of interactions in Section 3.4.1, and
reducing the number of hyperparameters in Section 3.4.2. In addition, Section 3.4 contains Subsection 3.4.3, which
summarizes BERT-based approaches and considers effective training strategies before a comparative study is provided
in Section 3.4.4. We also introduce a category of BERT-based term weight prediction in Section 3.5. Finally, we present
a review of approaches to BERT-based query expansion and document expansion in Section 3.6 and Section 3.7,
respectively.
3.1 Preliminary Overview of BERT
BERT [44] was introduced by Devlin et al. to develop a robust language model. Before the success of BERT, most
of the state-of-the-art approaches (e.g., CoVe [19], ELMo [73], and GPT [10]) were unidirectional or sequential, and
thus failed to leverage contextual relationships across text inputs that led to a poor pretrained model. The bidirectional
property of the BERT model allows it to learn the context of unlabeled text from both the left and the right sides such
that it yields a good pretrained NLP model. BERT is essentially the encoder part of a transformer with the additional
step of masking some of the input tokens and the additional objective of predicting the masked word based only on
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 9]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 9
the context of the tokens surrounding it. The encoder receives each of the masked tokens that are conditioned on the
remaining tokens in the sentence, where this renders the decoder redundant.
BERT provides both simple and complex models: BERTBase (layers=12, hidden dimensions=768, self-attention
heads=12, parameters=110M) and BERTLarge (layers=24, hidden dimensions=1024, self-attention heads=16, parameters=340M). Owing to its more complex architecture and a larger number of hyperparameters, BERTLarge outperforms
BERTBase under the same training and fine-tuning processes. The input representation of BERT consists of three parts:
a WordPiece token embedding [143] (i.e., the original vocabulary consists of individual symbols in the language, and the
most frequent combinations of symbols are then iteratively added to the vocabulary), position embedding, and segment
embedding (each token of the first sentence is denoted by 𝐸𝐴, and each token of the second sentence is denoted by 𝐸𝐵)
(see Figure 2 for details). There are two special tokens in BERT: the [CLS] token and the [SEP] token. The [CLS] token
is always the first token of the input sequence for classification and the [SEP] token is the separator between sequences.
The maximum length of an input containing the two special tokens is limited to 512.
BERT addresses the limitations and disadvantages of ELMo and OpenAI GPT by using the pretraining objectives of
MLM and NSP. The MLM randomly masks some words from the input texts during training and then predicts them from
contextual information. During pretraining, 15% of WordPiece (i.e., a variant of byte pair encoding [102] methods) [143]
tokens were chosen at random for prediction. Each chosen token had a 80% chance of being replaced by the [𝑀𝐴𝑆𝐾 ]
token, a 10% chance of being replaced by a random token, and a 10% chance of self-replacement. In addition, BERT uses
NSP to predict whether a pair of sentences is sequential (i.e., whether the second sentence is the next sentence in the
original text).
3.2 Utilizing BERT for Handling Long Documents
As a pioneer pretrained language model, BERT [44] has drawn significant attention from the NLP community.
Although BERT [44] is successful on short text-based applications (usually limited to 512 tokens), it fails to process long
documents due to the limitation on the maximum length of the input sequence. To resolve this issue, state-of-the-art
BERT-based methods rely on two categories of models: the aggregation-guided model and the block selection model.
State-of-the-art aggregation-guided methods [74, 132, 144, 147] focus on dividing a long document into small
segments, e.g., sentences and overlapping passages, where the final document score is an aggregation of the top k
scores retrieved by BERT and the original document score retrieved by a traditional model. Section 3.3.1 provides a
comprehensive review of aggregation-based approaches to BERT. It suggests that such approaches may suffer from a
loss of important information that leads to problems related to time, memory, and energy consumption.
Different from aggregation-guided methods, the block selection model (e.g., KeyBLD [ 74]) relies on selecting key
blocks to form a short document that can then be processed by using a state-of-the-art BERT-based model. The idea
of selecting key blocks with respect to the entire document by using the BERT model was proposed by Ding et al. in
Cognize Long TeXts (CogLTX) [71]. Inspired by the cognitive theory proposed by Baddeley [3], CogLTX considers the
analogy between BERT and human memory to implement long-term memory. The main step in CogLTX is MemRecall,
the process of identifying the relevant text blocks by treating the blocks as episodic memories. MemRecall imitates the
working memory in terms of competitive retrieval, rehearsal, and decay to facilitate multi-step reasoning. Another
BERT model, called judge, is introduced to CogLTX to score the relevance of the blocks and is trained jointly with the
original BERT reasoner. Although the use of CogLTX for IR applications has not been explored, it works as a basic
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 10]
10 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
Fig. 3. Overview of the architecture of KeyBLD. [ 74]. The KeyBLD model comprises four key components: block segmentation, block
selection, query-blocks representation, and document ranking. The block segmentation phase divides documents into smaller blocks,
while traditional IR models assign relevance scores to each block. The query-blocks representation step concatenates the query with
the most relevant blocks, and this is the input to the BERT model for document re-ranking and improved retrieval performance.
building block for KeyBLD [74], which is used in IR applications. In contrast to CogLTX, KeyBLD [74] first selects the
key blocks of a long document by local query–block preranking, and then aggregates a few blocks to form a short
document that can be processed by BERT for ad-hoc IR. Figure 3 illustrates the basic architecture of KeyBLD. The
experimental analysis of KeyBLD [74] indicates that it outperforms the relevant state-of-the-art approaches and is
faster than them.
3.3 Utilizing BERT for Integrating Semantic Information
The bidirectional property of BERT-based models enables the learning of the context (i.e., semantic information) of
unlabeled texts from both the left and the right sides, and lays the foundation for obtaining contextualized embeddings.
We first briefly discuss the use of BERT-based models for aggregating long documents in Section 3.3.1 and then present
ranking strategies in Section 3.3.2. We then cover techniques of weak supervision that leverage BERT-like models in
Section 3.3.3. Finally, we provide an extended comparison and analyses based on experiments in Section 3.3.4.
3.3.1 Aggregation Methods for Long Documents. A number of state-of-the-art approaches [ 74, 132, 144, 147]
can be considered to be aggregation techniques that combine shorter segments of texts to handle long documents.
Aggregation-guided BERT models for IR can be divided into three groups, sentence-level score aggregation, passage-level
score aggregation, and passage-level representation aggregation, as shown in Table 1. This section briefly discusses
aggregation-guided BERT-based approaches as a subclass of BERT-based models for integrating semantic information,
while the previous section (Section 3.2) considered aggregation-guided methods and block selection models for handling
long documents.
• Sentence-level score aggregation: The state-of-the-art [132, 144] approaches of this sort divide the document
into a set of sentences, where the final document score is a linear aggregation of the top k scores retrieved by BERT
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 11]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 11
Table 1. Aggregation methods for handling long documents
Type Model Aggregation Methods
Sentence-level score aggregation [132], [144] Top-3
Passage-level score aggregation
[147] FirstP, MaxP, SumP
[136] AvgP
[108] TopKP
Passage-level representation aggregation
[112] AvgP
[23] PARADEAvg, PARADESum, PARADEMax,
PARADEAttn, PARADECNN,
PARADETransformer
and the original document score retrieved by the traditional model. Yang et al. [132] used the sentence-level model
to apply BERT to document retrieval and divided the document into a set of sentences by combining the BERT score
with the BM25 (Anserini [94]) score to obtain the final score of document retrieval. Specifically, the final document
score was a linear aggregation of the top k scores retrieved by BERT and the original document score retrieved by the
traditional model. Yilmaz et al. [132] proposed a system called 𝐵𝑖𝑟𝑐ℎ [144], which is similar to the proposal in [132],
that is shown in Figure 4. Both these studies ([144], [132]) reported experiments on two datasets: the TREC 2011-2014
Microblog and Robust04. The lengths of the documents in the TREC Microblog dataset fitted the BERT model well.
Every document in the Robust04 dataset was split into a set of sentences. The results on the TREC Microblog dataset
showed that BERT outperformed previously developed neural ranking models and demonstrated its suitability for
passage ranking. The experiments on the Robust04 dataset involved a linear aggregation of the scores of the top three
sentences and the original document score as the final document score. The results of Birch show that fine-tuning
across multiple datasets can help obtain a better fit with the target dataset. For example, Birch (MS → MB) achieved
the best results and outperformed Birch fine-tuned on MS MARCO, while Birch (MS → MB) was first fine-tuned on MS
MARCO (MS) and then on the TREC Microblog (MB) dataset. However, the sentence-level score aggregation-based
BERT suffers from the loss of important information as well as relevant judgment.
• Passage-level score aggregation: The state-of-the-art approaches [108, 136, 147] of this kind rely on segmenting
long documents into small overlapping passages. These passages are formed by considering the passage length and the
stride length to prevent passages of a long document from becoming independent of one another. Hence, document-level
retrieval can be realized by aggregating passage scores [108, 136, 147]. Dai and Callan proposed different aggregation
scores that split a long document into overlapping passages of length 150, i.e., a 150-word sliding window with a
stride of 75 words [147]. Any of three approaches can be used to obtain the final document-level retrieval score: 1)
BERT-FirstP: by selecting the score of the first passage; 2) BERT-MaxP: by selecting the maximum passage score; and 3)
BERT-SumP: by taking the sum of all passage scores. Zhang et al. proposed AvgP [136], which takes the average score
of all passages as the final document retrieval score. MaxP and TopKP must obtain all passage relevance scores via an
expensive pretrained model, e.g., BERT, and select the maximum relevant passage or the top k passages. To simplify the
selection process, Hofstätter et al. selected the top k passages through a lightweight and fast model [108] called the
ESM (efficient student model), and estimated the selected passages by using an expensive model. Despite its success,
this strategy may still cause problems related to time, memory, and energy consumption. Furthermore, considering
passages irrelevant to the given query may introduce noise to the final representation and limit the identification of
long-distance dependencies between the relevant tokens.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: Type | Model | Aggregation Methods | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: Type: Sentence-level score aggregation | Model: [132], [144] | Aggregation Methods: Top-3 | Unnamed: 0:
Row 2: Type: | Model: [147] | Aggregation Methods: FirstP, MaxP, SumP | Unnamed: 0:
Row 3: Type: Passage-level score aggregation | Model: [136] | Aggregation Methods: AvgP | Unnamed: 0:
Row 4: Type: | Model: [108] | Aggregation Methods: TopKP | Unnamed: 0:
Row 5: Type: | Model: [112] | Aggregation Methods: AvgP | Unnamed: 0:
Row 6: Type: Passage-level representation aggregation | Model: [23] | Aggregation Methods: PARADEAvg, PARADESum, | Unnamed: 0: PARADEMax,
Row 7: Type: | Model: | Aggregation Methods: PARADEAttn, | Unnamed: 0: PARADECNN,
Row 8: Type: | Model: | Aggregation Methods: PARADETransformer | Unnamed: 0:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 12]
12 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
Fig. 4. The architecture of Birch showcases seamless integration between Python and the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), thus enabling
the efficient utilization of neural networks like BERT. The main code-entry point implemented in Python leverages the capabilities of
the JVM to facilitate document retrieval through the Lucene search library. The top k candidates retrieved from JVM’s Anserini are
then input to BERT for a secondary ranking process [144].
• Passage-level representation aggregation: State-of-the-art approaches [23, 112] that fall into this category rely
on aggregating the passage representations rather than the passage scores. Li et al. proposed passage representation
aggregation for document reranking (PARADE) [23]. It uses six approaches to aggregate passage-level signals for a long
document: 1) PARADEAvg: adopting average pooling for the passage representations of a long document to obtain the
final document representation, where this is similar to CEDR [112]; 2) PARADESum: performing additive pooling across
passage representations; 3) PARADEMax: using element-wise max pooling for all passage representations to obtain
the representation of the final document; 4) PARADEAttn: adopting a feedforward network to generate an attention
weight for each passage; 5)PARADECNN: generating pairs of passage representations using several convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) until only one remains; and 6) PARADETransformer: aggregating passage representations through two
randomly initialized transformer encoders. To obtain context-aware passage-level signals, Wu et al. introduced the
passage-level cumulative gain model (PCGM) to rank documents [154]. In their model, BERT was first applied to obtain
passage-level [CLS] representations, following which they were aggregated via LSTM [5].
3.3.2 Ranking Strategies via BERT. To investigate how pretrained transformer encoder-based contextualized language models can be utilized for ad-hoc document ranking, researchers have attempted to retrieve documents via
various ranking strategies. As shown in [99, 132, 144], BERT-like models have a better capability of representation than
state-of-the-art non-BERT-based IR approaches [17, 18, 46, 90, 117, 126] for ad-hoc document ranking. MacAvaney et
al. introduced contextualized embeddings for document ranking (CEDR) [112] that combines BERT embeddings with
neural ranking models to enhance term representations and improve the performance of neural ranking models. They
combined the contextualized word embeddings of BERT and ELMo with certain neural ranking models, including the
position-aware deep model for relevance matching in IR: PACRR [63], KNRM [18], and DRMM [46]. The BERT model
can simultaneously encode multiple text segments by utilizing the two meta-tokens ([SEP] and [CLS]) and text segment
embeddings (e.g., Segments A and B). [SEP] acts as a separator of each segment while [CLS] is used to make contextual
judgments about the text pairs. More precisely, [CLS] is used during training to predict whether two segments are
sequential, e.g., whether Segment A immediately precedes Segment B in the original text. Thus, incorporating the [CLS]
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 13]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 13
Fig. 5. Comparison of GloVe word embeddings, ELMo representations (layer 2), and fine-tuned BERT representations (layer 5) for
relevant and irrelevant documents in relation to a given query [112]. Lighter colors represent higher similarity scores.
token into the neural network allows the neural rankers to benefit from deep semantic information from BERT in
addition to individual contextualized token matches. Incorporating the [CLS] token into the ranking models is a two-step
process. First, the model produces relevance scores for each query term based on similarity matrices. Then, for models
using a dense combination, CEDR concatenates the [CLS] vector with the signals of the model. For models that sum
query term scores, such as the DRMM [46], CEDR shows that using the [CLS] vector in the dense calculation is effective.
To better understand the contributions of contextualized word embeddings to the model, the experimental evaluation
of CEDR involves visual comparison of GloVe word embeddings, ELMo representations (layer 2), and fine-tuned BERT
representations (layer 5) as shown in Figure 5. For the query “curbing population growth” in this figure, the term
"curb" that appears in both relevant and non-relevant documents has two distinct senses. However, GloVe predicts
the same similarity score for both candidates. By contrast, both ELMO and BERT assign a higher similarity score to
the appropriate sense of the term in response to the query, demonstrating the capabilities of semantic understanding
of contextualized models. Their performance on the Robust04 and WebTrack 2012-14 datasets demonstrated that the
neural ranking models that used fine-tuned BERT representations (CEDR-PACRR, CEDR-KNRM, and CEDR-DRMM)
outperformed the others. This verified the influence of contextualized embeddings on the performance of neural ranking
models.
Qiao et al. [89] systematically analyzed the [CLS] embedding in different layers of BERT. In their work, three
interaction-focused models based on theBERTLarge model were introduced:BERTLast-Int, BERTMult-Int, andBERTTerm-Trans.
BERTLast-Int extracts features from the last layer of the [CLS] embedding and then combines them with a weight parameter. Inspired byBERTLast-Int, BERTMult-Int extracts features from the [CLS] embeddings of all layers. Each layer’s [CLS]
embedding is first combined with a weight parameter, and the features of all layers are then integrated. BERTTerm-Trans
produces a transition matrix for the query and the document, and then integrates the transition matrices from all layers
via mean pooling. Qiao et al. [89] conducted experiments on two datasets: MS MARCO and ClueWeb09-B. The results
showed that the three interaction-based BERT models delivered varying results on different datasets. BERTLast-Int
delivered better performance than the other two models on the MS MARCO dataset, and BERTMult-Int delivered the
worst performance in terms of MRR@10. However, BERTMult-Int outperformed the other two methods on CluWeb09-B
in terms of NDCG@20 and ERR@20.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 14]
14 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
Fig. 6. Architecture of the multi-stage ranking model proposed by Nogueira et al. [ 100]. The process consists of three stages, denoted
by 𝐻0, 𝐻1, and 𝐻2. The first stage, 𝐻0, produces an initial ranking list retrieved by a simple traditional model for the entire corpus.
The second stage, 𝐻1, monoBERT, serves as a reranker to obtain a more precise ranking. In the third stage, duoBERT adopts pairwise
learning to further enhance the quality of the ranking list.
All the important models discussed above examine correlations between documents and a query to obtain a
final, sorted list related to the query. This raises the following question: If all elements of a previously sorted list are
fed in pairs into BERT for comparison and a second sorted list is thus obtained, is the latter list consistent with the
former list? Nogueira et al. provided an answer in [ 100]. They used three stages, denoted by 𝐻0, 𝐻1, and 𝐻2, in an
iterative process (i.e., the output of each stage served as the input to the next stage). The first stage, 𝐻0, produced
an initial ranking retrieved by a simple traditional model for the entire corpus that was denoted by 𝑅0 (i.e., the top
𝑘0 candidate documents). In the second stage, 𝐻1, monoBERT [100], served as a reranker to obtain a more precise
ranking 𝑅1 from 𝑅0. Finally, the top 𝑘1 candidate documents of 𝑅1 were fed into duoBERT [100] in the third stage
𝐻2. Furthermore, duoBERT used a triple (𝑞, 𝑑𝑖, 𝑑𝑗 ) as input to produce the probability 𝑝𝑖,𝑗 used to assess the degree
to which candidate 𝑑𝑖 was more relevant than 𝑑 𝑗 , where 𝑑𝑖, 𝑑𝑗 ∈ 𝑅1. The architecture of this system is illustrated in
Figure 6. The duoBERT model can be characterized as a pairwise approach and monoBERT as a pointwise approach in
this framework. The authors conducted experiments on the MS MARCO and TREC CAR datasets, and represented the
results in terms of the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) and the mean average precision (MAP) during different stages of
retrieval. The experimental findings indicated that a multi-stage architecture offers more advantages in generating
an accurate ranking list than a single-stage architecture. The primary limitation of the single-stage architecture lies
in its inability to learn the relationships between documents. By contrast, the multi-stage architecture addresses this
challenge by framing the problem of document ranking as a comparison of different documents. This approach is crucial
for achieving a high-quality ranking list. While 𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 and 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 apply different ranking strategies in different
stages, duoBERT can more precisely find the most relevant document in a pair but incurs a higher computational cost.
3.3.3 Weak Supervision via BERT. While supervised learning technology has achieved great success, it has come
at the cost of expensive data annotation. Like many deep learning architectures, the data-hungry nature of BERT poses
a significant challenge to accurate retrieval. Dai and Callan [147] found that when BERT was fine-tuned on user clicks
from Bing, its accuracy on TREC Web Tracks improved by 16% in comparison with the scenario when only masked
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 15]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 15
Fig. 7. The architecture of ReInfoSelect [65] consists of a state network, an action network, and a reward. The state network represents
the anchor-document (a-d) pair while the action network determines whether to retain the pair. The training reward is obtained from
the ranker that has undergone training.
LM-based pretraining was used. Weakly supervised pretrained models are trained on extensive amounts of data with
limited or incomplete labeling information, leading them to acquire more general features and semantic representations.
Consequently, these models exhibit impressive performance on new domains or tasks. On the contrary, the efficacy of a
supervised model on a specific task may be constrained by the domain of its training data.
Although a number of weak supervision-based ad-hoc approaches to IR are available [24, 40, 41, 70, 83, 84, 103],
few studies [65, 93] have considered a BERT architecture that relies on weak supervision. Zhang et al. proposed a
reinforcement learning technique, 𝑅𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑓 𝑜𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡 [65], that can guide ranking models to obtain more useful information.
It consists of three components, a state network, an action network, and a training reward, as illustrated in Figure 7.
The state network contains an a-d (anchor-document) pair that is fed into the action network to determine whether it
should be used. 𝑅𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑓 𝑜𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡 uses the 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑦𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡 approach to connect the state network to the action network
to select useful a-d pairs for weak supervision. The remaining a-d pairs are fed into BERT to obtain a reward and
then are returned to the state and action networks. Their normalized discounted cumulative gain values at a cut-off of
20 (as in NDCG@20) and ERR@20 on the ClueWeb09-B, Robust04, and ClueWeb12-B13 datasets, obtained by using
both Conv-KNRM and BERT, were then compared. The results indicated good performance. Xu et al. [93] proposed
weak supervision for passage ranking (PR) via BERT. This model consists of three components: labeling functions,
label aggregation, and supervised training. The labeling functions consist of four scoring functions: (1) BM25 score, (2)
TF-IDF, (3) cosine similarity of the representation of a universal embedding [26], and (4) cosine similarity of the last
hidden layer. The most significant difference between the weakly supervised methods was in the manner in which the
labels were obtained. To simplify the process of interaction, Hofstätter et al. used the top k passages via a lightweight
and fast selection model, the EST [109]. They then used a computationally expensive model to estimate the relevance
scores of the selected passages, rather than making relevance estimations for all passages of a document, to avoid
wasting computational resources.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 16]
16 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
3.3.4 Extended Analysis of Comparisons and Experiments. In light of differences in the datasets and the evaluation indicators used in different studies, their experimental comparison is provided in Table 2. We considered
representative models and compared their values in terms of different evaluation metrics on the MS MARCO, TREC
CAR, and Robust04 datasets. All the considered approaches [65, 89, 99, 100, 112] used consistent experimental settings
that enabled us to draw a fair comparison. For example, for the MS MARCO dataset, all models in Table 2 utilized the
official BERT models that had been pretrained on the full Wikipedia website, while for the TREC CAR dataset, the
BERT reranker was pretrained on half of the Wikipedia website to avoid the leakage of test data into the training data.
Table 2. Comparison of empirical results of different methods in terms of MRR@10, MAP, and NDCG@20 on the MS MARCO, TREC
CAR, and Robust04 datasets.
Models MS MARCO dataset TREC CAR dataset Robust04 dataset
Strategy Approach MRR@10 (Dev) MRR@10 (Eval) MAP (Test) NDCG@20
Traditional IR model BM25 (Microsoft Baseline) 0.167 0.165 0.130 0.414
BM25 (Anserini) 0.187 0.190 0.153 The different architectures of BERT 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒 [99] 0.347 - 0.310 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐿𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒 0.365 0.358 0.335 Models based on BERTBase
Passage-level representation
aggregation via BERT
PARADE-Avg [23] - - - 0.512
PARADE-Sum - - - 0.539
PARADE-Max - - - 0.544
PARADE-Attn - - - 0.527
PARADE-CNN - - - 0.563
PARADE-Transformer - - - 0.566
Combining BERT with neural
ranking models
CEDR-PACRR via BERT [112] - - - 0.515
CEDR-KNRM via BERT - - - 0.538
CEDR-DRMM via BERT - - - 0.526
Weak supervision via BERT
ReInfoSelect (Conv-KNRM)[65] - - - 0.442
ReInfoSelect (BERT) - - - 0.450
Models based on BERTLarge
Multi-stage ranking via BERT
(Anserini BM25) monoBERT [100] 0.372 0.365 0.348 monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑀𝐴𝑋 0.326 - 0.326 monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑀𝐼 𝑁 0.379 - - monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑆𝑈 𝑀 0.382 0.370 0.369 monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝐵𝐼 𝑁 𝐴𝑅𝑌 0.383 - 0.369 monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑆𝑈 𝑀 + TCP
(target corpus pretraining)
0.390 0.379 - Constructing various
contextualized embeddings via
BERT
BERT (Last-Int) [89] 0.337 0.359 - BERT (Mult-Int) 0.306 0.329 - BERT (Term-Trans) 0.331 0.356 - In Table 2, both BERTBase and BERTLarge serve as the reranker to rerank candidate documents retrieved by the
traditional model, e.g., BM25. The above comparison yields three main conclusions:
• The MS MARCO dataset has an average of one relevant passage per query. To estimate the performance of the
models on MS MARCO, the researchers used the mean reciprocal rank of the first correct answer. Because Anserini
[94] aims to connect academic research on IR with the development of search applications, the initial candidate list
produced by Anserini’s implementation of the BM25 algorithm exhibited a notable improvement of 12% over the BM25
implementation by Microsoft on the MS MARCO dataset. This distinction had a noticeable impact on the final retrieval
performance, specifically when comparing monoBERT with the BERT models introduced by Nogueira et al. [99]. In this
context, monoBERT utilizes BERT as the binary relevance classifier. This has also been illustrated by Lin et al. [50].
Moreover, monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝐵𝐼 𝑁 𝐴𝑅𝑌 and monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑆𝑈 𝑀 outperformed monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑀𝐼 𝑁
on the development set. By using the 𝑇𝐶𝑃 , monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑆𝑈 𝑀 achieved the best performance. monoBERT +
𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑀𝐴𝑋 delivered the worst performance on the development set, 6% worse than that of 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒 . In addition,
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[TABLE page=16 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Models | MS MARCO dataset | TREC CAR dataset | Robust04 dataset
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Strategy | Models: Approach | MS MARCO dataset: MRR@10 (Dev) MRR@10 (Eval) | TREC CAR dataset: MAP (Test) | Robust04 dataset: NDCG@20
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Models: BM25 (Microsoft Baseline) | MS MARCO dataset: 0.167 0.165 | TREC CAR dataset: 0.130 | Robust04 dataset: 0.414
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Traditional IR model | Models: | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Models: BM25 (Anserini) | MS MARCO dataset: 0.187 0.190 | TREC CAR dataset: 0.153 | Robust04 dataset: Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Models: BERT [99] | MS MARCO dataset: 0.347 - | TREC CAR dataset: 0.310 | Robust04 dataset: Row 6: Unnamed: 0: BaseThe different architectures of BERT | Models: | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Models: BERT | MS MARCO dataset: 0.365 0.358 | TREC CAR dataset: 0.335 | Robust04 dataset: Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Models: Large | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: Models based on BERTBase | Models: | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Models: PARADE-Avg [23] | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.512
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Models: PARADE-Sum | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.539
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: Passage-level representation | Models: PARADE-Max | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.544
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: aggregation via BERT | Models: PARADE-Attn | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.527
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Models: PARADE-CNN | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.563
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Models: PARADE-Transformer | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.566
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | Models: CEDR-PACRR via BERT [112] | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.515
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: Combining BERT with neural | Models: | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | Models: CEDR-KNRM via BERT | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.538
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: ranking models | Models: | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | Models: CEDR-DRMM via BERT | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.526
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | Models: ReInfoSelect (Conv-KNRM)[65] | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.442
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: Weak supervision via BERT | Models: ReInfoSelect (BERT) | MS MARCO dataset: - - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: 0.450
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: Models based on BERTLarge | Models: | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: | Models: (Anserini BM25) monoBERT [100] | MS MARCO dataset: 0.372 0.365 | TREC CAR dataset: 0.348 | Robust04 dataset: Row 25: Unnamed: 0: | Models: monoBERT + duoBERT | MS MARCO dataset: 0.326 - | TREC CAR dataset: 0.326 | Robust04 dataset: Row 26: Unnamed: 0: | Models: MAX | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: | Models: monoBERT + duoBERT | MS MARCO dataset: 0.379 - | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: Row 28: Unnamed: 0: MI NMulti-stage ranking via BERT | Models: | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: | Models: monoBERT + duoBERT | MS MARCO dataset: 0.382 0.370 | TREC CAR dataset: 0.369 | Robust04 dataset: Row 30: Unnamed: 0: | Models: SU M | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: | Models: monoBERT + duoBERT | MS MARCO dataset: 0.383 - | TREC CAR dataset: 0.369 | Robust04 dataset: Row 32: Unnamed: 0: | Models: BI N ARY | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: | Models: monoBERT + duoBERT + TCP | MS MARCO dataset: 0.390 0.379 | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: Row 34: Unnamed: 0: | Models: SU M | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: | Models: (target corpus pretraining) | MS MARCO dataset: | TREC CAR dataset: | Robust04 dataset:
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: Constructing various | Models: BERT (Last-Int) [89] | MS MARCO dataset: 0.337 0.359 | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: Row 37: Unnamed: 0: contextualized embeddings via | Models: BERT (Mult-Int) | MS MARCO dataset: 0.306 0.329 | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: Row 38: Unnamed: 0: BERT | Models: BERT (Term-Trans) | MS MARCO dataset: 0.331 0.356 | TREC CAR dataset: - | Robust04 dataset: -
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 17]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 17
𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒 outperformed 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐿𝑎𝑠𝑡-𝐼𝑛𝑡 , 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 -𝐼𝑛𝑡 , and 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑇 𝑒𝑟𝑚-𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠. Furthermore, Nogueira et al. applied the
[CLS] embedding of the last layer, which is similar to that of 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇Last-Int. However, the variable gap in performance
among 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒 , 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐿𝑎𝑠𝑡-𝐼𝑛𝑡 , 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 -𝐼𝑛𝑡 , and 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑇 𝑒𝑟𝑚-𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 might have stemmed from the variable batch size.
In general, it seems that applying BERT to obtain the correlation between candidate documents yields a significant
performance improvement, which in turn yields a novel area for sorting tasks in the field of IR.
• Similarly, monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝐵𝐼 𝑁 𝐴𝑅𝑌 and monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑆𝑈 𝑀 delivered the best performance on the
TREC CAR dataset, while monoBERT + 𝑑𝑢𝑜𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 𝑀𝐴𝑋 performed the worst, about 3% lower than 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐿𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒 .
• The original DRMM was used to compute the cosine distance between each word embedding of the query
and all word embeddings of documents in the Robust04 dataset and then mapped them to a histogram. It can thus
be considered a correlation model that omits location information. However, PACRR and KNRM can extract local
contextualized information through their convolution kernels. Using the contextualized word embeddings of BERT,
CEDR-KNRM achieved the best performance in terms of NDCG@20 on Robust04 and CEDR-PACRR performed slightly
worse than CEDR-DRMM. The performance of PARADE-CNN and PARADE-Transformer was superior to that of the
variants of CEDR, demonstrating that hierarchical aggregations can better preserve information that is beneficial to
document-ranking. Unsurprisingly, ReInfoSelect (Conv-KNRM) and ReInfoSelect (BERT) performed slightly better than
BM25.
3.4 BERT for Balancing Effectiveness and Efficiency
BERT models are more effective than previously proposed neural network ranking models in terms of document
retrieval. However, BERTBase has 110 million parameters and BERTLarge has 340 million parameters. Therefore, if the
query and the text are fed simultaneously into BERT, its computational complexity is high, leading to a long computation
time. To eliminate this deficiency, researchers have focused on two aspects: 1) reducing the interaction time between
the query and the document, i.e., through dual-encoder-based models, and 2) reducing the number of hyperparameters
of BERT, i.e., through distillation models. In light of these aspects, we discuss the state-of-the-art dual-encoder-based
models, distillation models, and effective training strategies in Sections 3.4.1, 3.4.2, and 3.4.3, respectively. Finally, we
provide an extended analysis of the relevant comparisons and experiments in Section 3.4.4.
3.4.1 Dual-encoder-based Models. Researchers have recently attempted to retrieve documents in a low-dimensional
embedding space [58, 69] through a dense retrieval model (DRM), the architecture of which is based on the representationfocused model. It maps queries and documents into low-dimensional embeddings via dual-encoders (i.e., the query
encoder and the document encoder).
To achieve a better trade-off between effectiveness and efficiency, researchers have attempted to encode independent
queries and documents to reduce the computational complexity of the stage involving their interaction. Qiao et al.
proposed BERT(Rep) [89], which independently encodes the query and the document via BERT, and uses the [CLS]
embeddings of the last layer as the representations of the query and the document. Then, relevance scores are calculated
based on their cosine similarities. They used the MS MARCO and CluWeb09-B datasets for their experiments. ERR@10
was used for evaluation on the MS MARCO dataset while NDCG@20 and ERR@20 were used for evaluation on
CluWeb09-B. BERT (Rep) was trained on “Train Triples" provided by MS MARCO for its dataset.
BERT-based dense models of retrieval focus on dense passage retrieval [58, 86, 87, 116, 142]. Khattab & Zaharia
proposed a post-interaction architecture called ColBERT [87] that independently encodes queries and documents via
BERT to reduce the computational complexity of the model (𝑛2 → 𝑛) and indexes the documents offline to reduce its
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 18]
18 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
Fig. 8. ColBERT [ 87] independently encodes queries and documents via BERT, and can reduce the computational complexity of the
model through late interaction.
time cost. ColBERT contains three components, a query encoder ( 𝑓𝑄), a document encoder (𝑓𝐷), and an interaction
machine, all of which are shown in Figure 8. ColBERT provides a novel approach to identifying the interactions
between a query and a document. The query and the document are first encoded separately via BERT to store the word
embeddings, and the similarity between each query embedding and all document embeddings is then calculated via an
interaction machine to obtain the maximum score. Finally, all the maximum scores of the query–document token pairs
are integrated to determine the relevance between the query and the document. The authors conducted experiments
on the MS MARCO and the TREC CAR datasets, and provided a comparison with BERTBase on the reranking and the
end-to-end tasks in terms of MRR@10. BERTBase was assessed in terms of MAP and MRR@10 values on the TREC CAR
dataset. Based on the experimental results, ColBERT achieves better performance than BERT (Rep).
ColBERT [104] was further improved by Lin et al. [50] by using knowledge distillation. Reimers and Gurevych
introduced Sentence-BERT [86] for passage ranking to obtain sentence embeddings via the Siamese network. Similar to
CEDR [112] and PARADEAvg, RepBERT [58] executes average pooling for all tokens in a passage to produce its final
representation. DPR [124] trains the query encoder and the document encoder on natural questions, Triviaqa (Trivia),
web questions (WQ), CuratedTrec (TREC), and Squad V1.1.
3.4.2 Distillation Models. To address the limitations related to memory and the long time needed by state-of-the-art
BERT models to make inferences, researchers have developed distillation models of BERT. Jiao et al. proposed TinyBERT
[133] that uses transformer distillation, general distillation, and task-specific distillation. Transformer distillation relies
on learning attention weights to enable the teacher (BERT) to transfer its linguistic knowledge to the student (TinyBERT),
while the other two steps of distillation subsequently utilize the learned knowledge to perform task-specific distillation
on augmented datasets. In contrast to TinyBERT, which uses distillation for building task-specific models, Sanh et al.
proposed DistilBERT [125], which uses knowledge distillation in pretraining to develop a lightweight, general-purpose,
and pretrained model. By utilizing advanced optimization techniques and reducing the number of layers, DistilBERT
[125] makes it possible to attain similar performance to that of larger models on many downstream tasks by using
much smaller language models pretrained by using knowledge distillation. Unlike [125, 133], FastBERT [128] uses a
unique self-distillation mechanism during training and an adaptive mechanism for inferences to improve its efficiency
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 19]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 19
Fig. 9. The inference procedure of FastBERT [ 128]. Given a batch of input sentences, the embedding layer translates it into an
embedding sequence. Transformer0 and Student-classifier0 infer its labels as probability distributions while calculating uncertainty.
without compromising its performance. Furthermore, FastBERT incorporates a dynamic layer adjustment mechanism
to reduce computational complexity. This means that the model can adaptively modify the number of execution layers
for each sample. For simpler samples, FastBERT utilizes fewer layers for prediction, while employing deeper layers
for more intricate samples. Moreover, FastBERT incorporates a distinctive self-distillation processing mechanism that
enables faster and more accurate results while minimizing changes to the model structure. The inferential process of
FastBERT is illustrated in Figure 9. In contrast to the above distillation-based variants of BERT, Lan et al. proposed the
ALBERT [151] model, which has a significantly smaller size and improves the speed of inferences. Note that ALBERT
mainly changes the model architecture through factorized embedding parameterization, cross-layer parameter sharing,
and inter-sentence loss of coherence.
To reduce the temporal complexity of inference in the two-input case from quadratic to linear, TwinBERT [129]
uses twin-structured BERT-like encoders to encode the query and the document, respectively, and a crossing layer to
combine the two embeddings and produce a similarity score. In contrast to BERT, the document representations in it
are precomputed and stored via offline caching. Due to the success of the knowledge distillation technique, the training
of TwinBERT is based on the teacher-student framework.
3.4.3 Effective Training Strategies. Researchers have explored different training strategies for pretrained transformer encoder-based contextualized language models. For instance, Sentence-BERT (SBERT) [86] uses Siamese and
triple networks to generate contextual sentence embeddings. It uses cosine similarity or the Manhattan/Euclidean
distance in the interaction stage to find semantically similar sentences. SBERT reduces the computational complexity of
the system from 𝑛2 to 𝑛 while ensuring accuracy. Approximate nearest-neighbor negative contrastive learning (ANCE)
[69] constructs negative samples from the corpus via the approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithm, where the
total number of negative samples is dynamically changed based on the training samples used. It solves the issue of a
difference in distributions between the training and the test datasets. The experimental results on MS MARCO and
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 20]
20 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
Table 3. Comparison of empirical results in terms of MRR@10 on MS MARCO.
Models MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset
Strategy Approach MRR@10 (Dev) MRR@10 (Eval)
Traditional IR model BM25 (Microsoft Baseline) 0.167 0.165
BM25 (Anserini) 0.187 0.190
Dual-encoder-based models
RepBERT [58](over BERTBase) 0.304 0.294
ColBERT (over BERTBase) [87] 0.349 0.349
DPR (BM25 + Rand Neg)(overBERTBase) [124] 0.311 Effective training strategies
ANCE (FirstP)[69](over RoBERTa Base) 0.330 TSA (Pairwise + In-Batch)[ 108](over
BERTBase)
0.338 TSA-Balanced (Pairwise + In-Batch) 0.340 Enhancing retrieval process with term weights
DeepCT [148] 0.243 EPIC + BM25 [111] 0.273 SparTerm [137] 0.275 SPLADE [121] 0.322 DeepImpact [9] 0.326 DeepImpact + ColBERT [9] 0.362 TREC DL showed that ANCE is superior to models that randomly sample negative values. The Topic-aware Sampling
(TSA) [108] approach performs a clustering operation by using K-means for queries. Its training can be implemented
according to the sampled topics. As a further improvement, Hofstätter et al. used TSA-Balanced to sample the negative
values in a batch via the maximum margin. The experimental results on MS MARCO and TREC DL showed that
TSA-Balanced is superior to TSA and random sampling. Wang et al. [134] followed the same pipeline that provides
representative feedback embeddings via K-means clustering.
3.4.4 Extended Analysis for Comparison and Experiments. Research on representation-focused BERT models
has mainly used the MS MARCO passage dataset. Due to its specificity (i.e., an average of one relevant passage per
query), researchers use the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) to obtain the reciprocal rank of the first correct answer. We
conducted an experimental comparison of representative models in terms of the MRR10 on the MS MARCO passage
dataset (see Table 3).
Table 3 illustrates the superior performance of pretrained BERT models compared with sparse retrieval models, such
as BM25. Among the representation-focused BERT models in dual-encoder-based architectures, ColBERT delivers the
best performance on the MS MARCO dataset. It leverages token-level contextualized information to match queries and
documents, thus enabling more precise targeting of the document content. On the contrary, RepBERT performs poorly
on the MS MARCO dataset as it generates output-contextualized text embeddings through average pooling, which is
not advantageous for capturing important representational information. Effective training strategies, specifically TSABalanced, outperform other models on the MS MARCO dataset, surpassing both TSA and ANCE. This finding highlights
the significant role of negative sample selection in enhancing the capability of the model to discriminate between
positive and negative samples. In conclusion, careful consideration of negative sample selection can significantly
improve the training process and enhance the model’s ability to distinguish between positive and negative instances.
3.5 BERT-based Predictions of Term Weights
IR models consider three major factors in general: the document length, term frequency, and term specificity [16,
54, 60]. However, the importance of a term in a document also depends on the semantic information relating the query
to the document [2, 79].
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[TABLE page=20 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Models | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Strategy | Models: Approach | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: MRR@10 (Dev) MRR@10 (Eval)
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Models: BM25 (Microsoft Baseline) | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.167 0.165
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Traditional IR model | Models: | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Models: BM25 (Anserini) | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.187 0.190
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Models: RepBERT [58](over BERTBase) | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.304 0.294
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: Dual-encoder-based models | Models: ColBERT (over BERTBase) [87] | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.349 0.349
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Models: DPR (BM25 + Rand Neg)(over BERTBase) [124] | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.311 Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Models: ANCE (FirstP)[69](over RoBERTa Base) | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.330 Row 9: Unnamed: 0: Effective training strategies | Models: TSA (Pairwise + In-Batch)[108](over | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.338 Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Models: BERTBase) | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Models: TSA-Balanced (Pairwise + In-Batch) | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.340 Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | Models: DeepCT [148] | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.243 Row 13: Unnamed: 0: Enhancing retrieval process with term weights | Models: EPIC + BM25 [111] | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.273 Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Models: SparTerm [137] | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.275 Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Models: SPLADE [121] | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.322 Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | Models: DeepImpact [9] | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.326 Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | Models: DeepImpact + ColBERT [9] | MS MARCO Passage Retrieval Dataset: 0.362 -
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 21]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 21
Fig. 10. Architecture of HDCT [ 149]. The purpose of passage-level term weighting is to obtain the contextualized term weights
for each passage. Moreover, HDCT integrates the contextualized term weights for all passages in the document for more accurate
document ranking.
To improve the efficiency of the retrieval stage, Dai and Callan proposed context-aware hierarchical document term
weighting (HDCT) [149] that provides a term-weighting framework for the retrieval stage in document ranking tasks,
as illustrated in Figure 10. Given a document 𝑑, HDCT first divides it into a set of passages. It produces contextualized
word embeddings via BERT for tokens of every passage and then uses a linear layer to obtain a real number as weight.
To ensure that integer values are obtained, HDCT uses two-digit precision to scale the predicted weight into an integer,
such as the term frequency. The results of experiments showed that HDCT delivers significantly better performance
than term frequency (tf).
Dai and Callan also proposed the DeepCT [148] framework that is similar to HDCT. Both use BERT to generate
the contextual embedding for each token in the passage and obtain a term frequency-like integer instead of a term
frequency value during the retrieval stage. The difference between the frameworks is that the former was designed to
rank passages while the latter to rank documents. In contrast to these approaches, MacAvaney et al. proposed Expansion
via Prediction of Importance with Contextualization (EPIC) [111], which models the importance of query/document
terms and executes document expansion. The reranking of passages by EPIC based on lexicon-grounded representations,
generated from contextualized language models, helps improve its performance such that it outperforms DeepCT [148],
HDCT [149], and DocT5Query [ 98] (as shown in Table 3). To address limitations in the training of the model as a
per-token regression task in DeepCT and HDCT, Mallia et al. introduced DeepImpact [9] that can obtain independent
term-based weights regardless of the co-occurrence of terms in the document. The major difference among the above
methods is that DeepImpact leverages DocT5Query [98] to enrich the original text via expansion terms.
Most of the above-mentioned studies sought to improve the capacity for dense representations of low-dimension
queries (documents), whereas term-based sparse representations play an important role in industrial applications. To
improve the sparse representations of Bag of Words (BoW) models (e.g., BM25), Xiong et al. introduced a framework
called SparTerm [137] that consists of two components: an important predictor and a gating controller. The importance
predictor can obtain a 30522D (i.e., the size of BERT’s vocab.txt file) passage-wise distribution of importance for each
passage by using a pretrained language model, and the gating controller provides expansion-enhanced vectors through
binary word vectors of the passage. In a further refinement, Formal et al. proposed SPLADE [ 121] on the basis of
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 22]
22 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
Fig. 11. A comparison of methods of query expansion [97].
SparTerm. It adds a logarithmic function to the importance predictor to prevent the dominance of certain terms and
smoothen the distribution of importance throughout the vocabulary. The major difference between SparTerm and
SPLADE is in the loss function.
While these models require fine-tuning on task-specific datasets to achieve optimum performance, recently
proposed LLMs like GPT-3 have demonstrated the capability of in-context learning via self-supervised pretraining on
large amounts of data. Note that in-context learning works based on learning through analogies drawn from the given
few-shot examples, thus making it possible for LLMs to solve tasks without requiring any task-specific fine-tuning.
However, training only by using self-supervised objectives may still lead to poor performance on many tasks. To
address this issue, the use of proximal policy optimization (PPO) with human feedback in a reinforcement learning (RL)
framework has been recently proposed. ChatGPT is the latest addition in this series that additionally uses dialog-based
instructional data in the supervised and RL-based meta-training stages. ChatGPT has shown the ability to perform
numerous tasks, and can outperform GPT-3. However, strong zero-shot performance across a wide range of tasks still
does not help it achieve optimum performance on IR tasks.
The comparative experimental analysis reported in Table 3 suggests that SparTerm and EPIC (based on BM25)
deliver the worst performance and are inferior to SPLADE, which illustrates the importance of utilizing sparse representations. DeepImpact followed by a ColBERT re-ranker is more effective, where this underlines the importance of
using independent term-based weighting.
3.6 BERT-based Query Expansion
Document ranking in IR is primarily dependent on the appropriate understanding of the query terms to retrieve
the relevant documents. Given the ability of BERT to capture contextual information based on the input text, it is
expected that longer queries contain more information than shorter queries. Thus, the same collection of documents
may result in a higher accuracy of document retrieval for longer queries. This situation has led to the emergence of the
concept of query expansion [57, 156].
To expand queries for reranking by BERT, Padaki et al. [97] proposed three methods: 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 ,
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡𝑠 , and 𝐻𝑦𝑏𝑟𝑖𝑑 expansion. The details of these approaches are as follows:
(1) 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 produces a coherent sentence by adding structure words to it. The relevant study
focused on two main approaches when adding a structure: 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 and 𝑇 𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 .
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 23]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 23
(a) Process of chunk selection using the sliding window approach with BERT.
(b) Process of reranking documents by using selected chunks
Fig. 12. Schematic illustration of BERT-QE proposed by Zheng et al. [157].
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 copies keywords from the original query and adds question tokens to generate a new
query without adding new concepts to the original query. 𝑇 𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 contains all the keywords of
the original query in the new query and lets the structure expand until it reaches a maximum threshold.
(2) 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡𝑠 adds new concepts to the original query by using additional terms.𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑄𝐸𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡𝑠
combines the relevance model RM3, which involves the classic pseudo-relevance feedback. A method of automatic local analysis is provided to improve retrieval performance without additional interaction to discover
the relevant concepts.
(3) The 𝐻𝑦𝑏𝑟𝑖𝑑 structure and concept expansions were implemented in a method called 𝐺𝑜𝑜𝑔𝑙𝑒𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 .
Figure 11 shows a comparison of these methods of query expansion. The experimental evaluation of these three
methods [97] on Robust04 showed that ClassicQEConcepts based on discrete terms to expand the query delivered the
worst performance, while FilteredGoogleQuestions based on structures and concepts delivered better performance on
“Query Title" and “Query description. "
Because BERT can obtain contextualized embeddings, researchers have explored the advantages of query expansion.
Zheng et al. proposed the BERT-QE model in [157]. It is a method of query expansion based on BERT for document
reranking that uses important information from pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF). The BERT-QE model consists of three
phases: (1) reranking the initial candidate documents retrieved by BM25 via BERT, (2) selecting fixed-length chunks for
query expansion from the top-ranking documents obtained from phase one, and (3) reranking the documents with a
combination of the original query and selected chunks. More details of the last two phases are shown in Figure 12. The
results of experiments on the Robust04 and GOV2 datasets showed that BERT-QE outperformed BERTLarge. Moreover,
BERT-QE-LLL (BERT-Large during three phases) recorded gains of 2.5%, 2.5%, and 3.3% on P@20, NDCG@20, and
MAP@1k compared with 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝐿𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒 , respectively. However, it had a 30% higher computational cost thanBERTLarge.
Moreover, all the above approaches failed to identify any new relevant document from the collection that had not been
retrieved in the initial ranking.
Naseri et al. proposed contextualized embeddings for query expansion (CEQE) [114], which is similar to BERT-QE.
It provides improvements based on a probabilistic language model combined with the PRF. It uses BERT to extract
contextualized embeddings for the query as well as for the terms in the top-ranking feedback documents and then
selects as expansion terms ones that are the closest to the query embeddings according to some similarity measure.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 24]
24 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
In Robust04, the variations in the CEQE can yield improvements of 10.5% and 19.9% on P@20 and MAP@1000 over
the BM25, respectively. Unlike BERT-QE, CEQE can be used to generate a new query of terms for execution on a
classical inverted index, but this comes at the cost of losing the contextual meaning of an expansion term (e.g., adding a
polysemous word to the query can lead to topic drift).
To address this issue, recent state-of-the-art approaches [35, 134] have exploited the advantages of using the PRF
mechanism to improve query representations in scenarios of dense retrieval. The ColBERT-PRF [134] approach was the
first to use PRF in a dense retrieval setting. As a robust mechanism of dense retrieval (a brief summary of ColBERT
is provided in Section 3.4.1), ColBERT-PRF improves performance in terms of dense retrieval for query expansion in
conjunction with PRF, which implements contextualized query expansion with dense retrieval, based on the pseudorelevance set of documents identified from the first-pass retrieval. ColBERT-PRF utilizes K-Means clustering to extract
representative feedback embeddings while ensuring that they can be used to discriminate among the representative
embeddings. Subsequently, the representative embeddings are incorporated into the query representation. Extensive
experimental evaluation of ColBERT-PRF on the TREC 2019 and 2020 supports their claims as it significantly outperforms
the relevant approaches.
Following the same pipeline, Yu et al. proposed ANCE-PRF [35], which improves query representations directly
from the pseudo-relevance labels by utilizing the query and the top retrieved documents from a dense retrieval model,
ANCE [69]. In this way, it learns to generate better query embeddings directly from the relevant labels such that the
document index remains unchanged and this reduces overhead. The experimental analysis reported for ANCE-PRF [35]
also indicated that under the same experimental settings, the margin of improvement obtained by using ANCE-PRF
over its baseline ANCE was higher than that obtained by using strong models for dense retrievals, such as ColBERT or
DistillBERT.
3.7 BERT-based Document Expansion
Inspired by methods of query expansion, researchers have explored expansions based on the documents themselves.
Yan et al. proposed the 𝐷𝑜𝑐 2𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 method to expand the document before indexing [101]. Given a document 𝑑, the
𝐷𝑜𝑐 2𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 model predicts a query related to it. The expanded document is a concatenation of the original document
and the predicted query. In contrast to other methods of query expansion that expand query representations,𝐷𝑜𝑐 2𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦
aims to improve its capability of retrieval by expanding the representations of the documents. The retrieved candidate
documents are fed into BERT for reranking. The results of experiments showed that BM25 yielded an improvement
of more than 15% in terms of the MAP and MRR@10 on both the TREC-CAR and the MS MARCO datasets by using
Doc2query. In the same context, Yan et al. [85] proposed a document expansion-based retriever that first generates a
query set for each passage, based on the pointer–generator model [11], and then performs indexing. After the retrieval
stage, the candidate documents are fed into BERT for reranking. Inspired by 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇 [131], which incorporates
the structural objectives of the word and the sentence to reconstruct their correct orders, the authors of this paper
addressed the challenging task of predicting the sentences preceding and following a given sentence, instead of the
original 𝑁 𝑆𝑃 task. The results of comprehensive experimental evaluations in [ 85] verified its superiority over the
relevant state-of-the-art approaches in terms of both passage ranking and document ranking.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 25]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 25
Table 4. Statistical information on collections
Collection Query Creation # Queries # Documents
MS MARCO (Dev) Manual 6980 8.8M
MS MARCO (Eval) Manual 6837 8.8M
MS MARCO v2 (Dev1) Manual 3903 138M
MS MARCO v2 (Dev2) Manual 4281 138M
TREC CAR Automatic 3.7M 29M
Robust04 Manual 250 0.5M
ClueWeb09-B Automatic / Manual 200 50M
ClueWeb12-B13 Automatic / Manual 100 52M
TREC 2011 Automatic / Manual 50 16M
TREC 2012 Automatic / Manual 60 16M
TREC 2013 Automatic / Manual 60 240M
TREC 2014 Automatic / Manual 55 240M
4 RESOURCES FOR BERT-BASED RANKING MODELS
In this section, we first present different datasets used in ad-hoc IR applications and then detail the resources
available for BERT for IR, including MatchZoo [45], Anserini [94], Pyserini [49], Birch [144], PyTerrier [22], Capreolus
[14], OpenNIR [110], and OpenMatch [152], in Section 4.2.
4.1 Datasets
Table 4 provides information on the datasets that are typically used in ad-hoc IR applications. We describe them
below.
MS MARCO: The Microsoft Machine Reading COmprehension dataset [ 123] consists of 8.8M passages for the
ranking task. The training set contains 500K pairs of queries and the relevant documents, the development set contains
6,980 queries and an evaluation set with approximately 6,800 queries. In July 2021, Microsoft released an updated
version of the MS MARCO collections called Version 2 (V2). Unlike the first version, in which the documents had
been collected at different points in time, the passages and documents in MS MARCO V2 were created from the same
underlying Bing web crawl. All the comparative statistics for MS MARCO V2 are shown in Table 4.
TREC CAR: The TREC CAR dataset [66] consists of 29M documents extracted from English Wikipedia, and has
five folds. The first four folds contain approximately 3M questions and the last fold contains 700K questions.
Robust04: TREC 2004 Robust Track is a standard ad-hoc retrieval dataset [31] containing 250 topics over a newswire
corpus of approximately 500K documents.
ClueWeb09-B4: ClueWeb09-B consists of 200 queries (i.e., Topics 1-50, 51-100, 101-150, 151-200) with relevance
labels from TREC Web Track 2009-2012, and contains 50M documents.
ClueWeb12-B13: ClueWeb12-B13 contains 100 queries from TREC Web Track 2013-2014 and 52M webpages.
TREC Microblog: This consists of test tweet collections from the TREC Microblog Tracks 2011 to 2014 [52]. The
salient targets of the track are social networks and real-time search. The TREC 2011 Microblog Tracks contains 50
queries and approximately 16 million tweets sampled from January 23 to February 8, 2011, from Twitter. For TREC
2012, the organizers used a new set of 60 topics and the same corpus as that of TREC 2011. TREC 2013 consists of 60
4https://github.com/cdegroc/warc-clueweb
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[TABLE page=25 index=1]
Columns: Collection | Query Creation | # Queries | # Documents
Row 1: Collection: MS MARCO (Dev) | Query Creation: Manual | # Queries: 6980 | # Documents: 8.8M
Row 2: Collection: MS MARCO (Eval) | Query Creation: Manual | # Queries: 6837 | # Documents: 8.8M
Row 3: Collection: MS MARCO v2 (Dev1) | Query Creation: Manual | # Queries: 3903 | # Documents: 138M
Row 4: Collection: MS MARCO v2 (Dev2) | Query Creation: Manual | # Queries: 4281 | # Documents: 138M
Row 5: Collection: TREC CAR | Query Creation: Automatic | # Queries: 3.7M | # Documents: 29M
Row 6: Collection: Robust04 | Query Creation: Manual | # Queries: 250 | # Documents: 0.5M
Row 7: Collection: ClueWeb09-B | Query Creation: Automatic / Manual | # Queries: 200 | # Documents: 50M
Row 8: Collection: ClueWeb12-B13 | Query Creation: Automatic / Manual | # Queries: 100 | # Documents: 52M
Row 9: Collection: TREC 2011 | Query Creation: Automatic / Manual | # Queries: 50 | # Documents: 16M
Row 10: Collection: TREC 2012 | Query Creation: Automatic / Manual | # Queries: 60 | # Documents: 16M
Row 11: Collection: TREC 2013 | Query Creation: Automatic / Manual | # Queries: 60 | # Documents: 240M
Row 12: Collection: TREC 2014 | Query Creation: Automatic / Manual | # Queries: 55 | # Documents: 240M
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 26]
26 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
queries and approximately 240M tweets collected from Twitter from February 1 to March 31, 2013. TREC 2014 contains
a set of 55 queries and the same collection as TREC 2013.
4.2 Resources for BERT-based Ranking Model
MatchZoo5 is a text-matching toolkit that focuses on developing text-matching models. This includes the design
and comparison of models. Examples of deep matching models include the DRMM, MatchPyramid [ 68], MV-LSTM
[118], DUET [20], ARC-I, ARC-II, and DSSM. MatchZoo uses a unified interface design for tasks including document
retrieval, question-answering, session response ranking, and synonym recognition. It contains three main modules for
data preprocessing, model building, and training and evaluation. Developed based on Keras, it supports TensorFlow,
the Computational Network Toolkit (CNTK), and Theano, and works seamlessly on both CPUs and GPUs. MatchZoo
focuses on the implementation of prevalent neural ranking models.
Anserini6 provides wrappers and extensions based on core Lucene libraries to perform common research tasks by
using intuitive APIs. The results of experiments on ad-hoc document retrieval have shown that BM25 (Anserini) is
superior to BM25 because it performs better in first-stage retrieval.
Pyserini7 is an easy-to-use Python toolkit for research on reproducible information retrieval with sparse and
dense representations. The aim is to support the IR research community by making use of effective, reproducible, and
easy-to-use first-stage retrieval in a multi-stage ranking architecture.Birch8 is a framework for document ranking via
BERT. It was written by using a combination of Python and Java Virtual Machine (JVM) code. The top k candidate
documents retrieved by Anserini are fed into BERT for reranking.
PyTerrier9 is a Python framework for conducting experiments on information retrieval based on Terrier10, which
provides an interface for downloading datasets and experimental functions. This allows for adequate comparisons
between approaches to retrieval on the same queries and evaluation metrics.
Capreolus11 is an NLP toolkit for ad-hoc document retrieval to enable mutual conversion between modules.
OpenNIR12 is a library for training and evaluating ranking tasks. It provides important information for fair comparisons,
including a reranking threshold and the loss function. It is implemented on PyTerrier.
OpenMatch13 is an open-source package for IR that uses neural ranking models for matching and understanding
deep text. It can be used for document retrieval, document reranking, and transfer learning across domains.
PyTerrier can provide interfaces for a detailed experimental setup to save the time needed to implement state-ofthe-art indexing and retrieval functionalities. This enables the rapid development and evaluation of large-scale retrieval
applications. Capreolus, OpenNIR, and OpenMatch are more suitable toolkits for drawing fair comparisons among
state-of-the-art IR approaches by tuning the hyperparameters during training.
5https://github.com/NTMC-Community/MatchZoo-py
6http://anserini.io/
7https://github.com/castorini/pyserini
8https://github.com/castorini/birch
9https://github.com/fennuDetudou/tudouNLP
10http://terrier.org/
11https://github.com/capreolus-ir/capreolus
12https://github.com/Georgetown-IR-Lab/OpenNIR
13https://github.com/thunlp/OpenMatch
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 27]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 27
5 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we provided a survey of the application of the BERT model to information retrieval. Because the
BERT model is based on the pretrained transformer encoder architecture, we also studied other pretrained transformer
encoders that are based on the BERT architecture. In our review, we summarized advanced methods based on the BERT
architecture to deal with long documents, integrate semantic information, balance effectiveness and efficiency, predict
term weights, and expand queries and documents. Furthermore, we analyzed the differences between approaches
based on the BERT model to enable the reader to clearly understand the advantages and disadvantages of each. Due
to inconsistencies in the datasets and evaluation metrics used for different models, we compared their published
experimental results on benchmark datasets.
We presented resources for utilizing BERT for IR, including MatchZoo [45], Anserini [94], Pyserini [49], Birch
[144], PyTerrier [22], Capreolus [14], OpenNIR [110], and OpenMatch [152]. We also discussed outstanding challenges
to the use of BERT for IR according to two perspectives: 1) methods of aggregating long documents, and 2) approaches
to balance effectiveness and efficiency. In addition, we emphasize the benefits of using encoder-based BERT models
over recent LLMs such as ChatGPT, which are decoder-based and require significant computational power.
The experimental evaluations of state-of-the-art methods showed that their accuracy on different datasets in terms
of MRR@10 was around 50%. Hence, there is considerable room for improvement. A number of directions can be adopted
in future research to this end. These include a novel combinatorial function to merge the contextualized embeddings of
the BERT model with other neural ranking models for neural IR via multi-task optimization [1, 75], and reinforcement
learning techniques [36, 72] to transform weakly supervised learning into unsupervised learning to reduce the cost
of training the data. Powerful generative large language models [4, 38, 39, 81, 88, 96] can be leveraged across various
stages of retrieval and ranking processes [ 130, 153] and be applied for more applications (such as biomedicine and
chemical IR) in the future [55, 76, 77, 135]. Moreover, these models can be beneficial in enhancing techniques of query
and document expansion [67]. Exploring the integration of Conversational Search Systems (CSS) [64] with multimodal
IR presents a promising future direction for more dynamic, user-centric interactions and precise information retrieval
through chat and voice technologies.
6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully appreciate all the anonymous reviewers and the associate editor for their valuable comments and
constructive suggestions that greatly helped improve the quality of the paper. The authors would like to thank Prof.
Xinhu Tu for his fruitful discussion when he visited our lab at York University. The authors also would like to thank
Dr. Junmei Wang for her contribution at the early stage of research when she was a PhD candidate at Central China
Normal University. All the work was done when the first author was a Ph.D. candidate. This research is supported
by the research grant (RGPIN-2020-07157) from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of
Canada, the York Research Chairs (YRC) program, and an Ontario Research Fund-Research Excellence (ORF-RE) award
from the BRAIN Alliance.
REFERENCES
[1] A Abolghasemi, S Verberne, and L Azzopardi. Improving BERT-based query-by-document retrieval with multi-task optimization. European
Conference on Information Retrieval. Springer, Cham, 2022.
[2] A Babashzadeh, M Daoud, and J X. Huang. Using semantic-based association rule mining for improving clinical text retrieval. Health Information
Science: Second International Conference, HIS 2013, London, UK, March 25-27, 2013. Proceedings 2. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[3] A Baddeley. Working memory. Science, 1992, 255(5044), 556-559.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 28]
28 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
[4] A Chowdhery, S Narang, J Devlin, M Bosma et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2023,
24(240): 1-113.
[5] A Graves, and J Schmidhuber. Framewise phoneme classification with bidirectional lstm and other neural network architectures, Neural networks,
2005, 18(5-6): 602-610.
[6] A H Lashkari, F Mahdavi, and V Ghomi. A boolean model in information retrieval for search engines. 2009 International Conference on Information
Management and Engineering. IEEE, 2009, 385-389.
[7] A Khan, A Sohail, U Zahoora, and A S Qureshi. A survey of the recent architectures of deep convolutional neural networks. Artificial intelligence
review, 2020, 53(8): 5455-5516. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-020-09825-6.
[8] A Krizhevsky, I Sutskever, and G E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 2017,
60(6), 84-90.
[9] A Mallia , O Khattab, T Suel, and N Tonellotto. Learning passage impacts for inverted indexes. Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2021, 1723-1727.
[10] A Radford , K Narasimhan , T Salimans and I Sutskever. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
[11] A See, P J Liu, and C D Manning. Get to the point: summarization with pointer-generator networks. Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. 2017, 1073-1083.
[12] A Vaswani, N Shazeer, N Parmar, J Uszkoreit, L Jones, A.N Gomez, L Kaiser, and I Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Proceedings of Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017, 30.
[13] A Wang, A Singh, J Michael, F Hill, O Levy, and SR Bowman. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.
[14] A Yates, S Arora, X Zhang, W Yang, KM Jose, and J Lin. Capreolus: A toolkit for end-to-end neural ad hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 2020, 861-864.
[15] A Yadav, D K Vishwakarma. Sentiment analysis using deep learning architectures: a review. Artificial Intelligence Review, 2020, 53(6): 4335-4385.
[16] B He, J X Huang, and X Zhou. Modeling term proximity for probabilistic information retrieval models. Information Sciences, 2011, 181(14): 3017-3031.
[17] B Hu, Z Lu, H Li, and Q Chen. Convolutional neural network architectures for matching natural language sentences. Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems-Volume 2. 2014, 2042-2050.
[18] C Xiong, Z Dai, and J Callan. End-to-end neural ad-hoc ranking with kernel pooling. Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR conference
on research and development in information retrieval. 2017, 55-64.
[19] B McCann, J Bradbury, C Xiong, and R Socher. Learned in translation: contextualized word vectors. Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2017: 6297-6308.
[20] B Mitra, F Diaz, and N Craswell. Learning to match using local and distributed representations of text for web search. In Proceedings of the 26th
international conference on world wide web. 2017, 1291-1299.
[21] B Mitra, and N Craswell. Neural models for information retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.01509. 2017.
[22] C Macdonald, and N Tonellotto. Declarative experimentation in information retrieval using PyTerrier. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGIR on
International Conference on Theory of Information Retrieval. 2020, 161-168.
[23] C Li, A Yates, S MacAvaney, B He, and Y Sun. PARADE: Passage representation aggregation for document reranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.09093,
2020.
[24] C Luo, Y Zheng, J Mao, Y Liu, M Zhang, and S Ma. Training deep ranking model with weak relevance labels. Australasian Database Conference.
Springer, Cham, 2017: 205-216.
[25] C Raffel, N Shazeer, A Roberts, K Lee, S Narang, M Matena, Y Zhou, W Li, and P J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
text-to-text transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683, 2019.
[26] D Cer, Y Yang, S Kong, N Hua, N Limtiaco, R.S John, N Constant, M Guajardo-Cespedes, S Yuan, C Tar, Y-H Sung, B Strope, and R Kurzweil. Universal
sentence encoder. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1803.11175, 2018.
[27] D Hiemstra. Using language models for information retrieval. Taaluitgeverij Neslia Paniculata, 2001.
[28] D W Otter, J R Medina, J K Kalita.. A survey of the usages of deep learning for natural language processing. IEEE transactions on neural networks
and learning systems, 2020, 32(2), 604-624.
[29] E Alsentzer, JR Murphy, W Boag, WH Weng, D Jin, T Naumann, and M McDermott. Publicly available clinical BERT embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.03323, 2019.
[30] E Kamalloo, X Zhang, O Ogundepo, N Thakur, D Alfonso-Hermelo, M Rezagholizadeh, J Lin. Evaluating embedding APIs for information retrieval.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06300, 2023.
[31] E M Voorhees. Overview of the TREC 2004 Robust Track. In TREC 2004, 2004, 52-69, .
[32] G Hinton, L Deng, D Yu, G Dahl, A Mohamed, N Jaitly, A Senior, V Vanhoucke, P Nguyen, B Kingsbury, and T Sainath. Deep neural networks for
acoustic modeling in speech recognition. IEEE Signal processing magazine, 2012, 29(6), 82-97.
[33] G Salton, A Wong, and C S A Yang. A vector space model for automatic indexing. Communications of the ACM, 1975, 18(11), 613-620.
[34] G Salton, EA Fox, and H Wu. Extended boolean information retrieval. Communications of the ACM. 1983 Nov 1;26(11), 1022-36.
[35] H C Yu, C Xiong, and J Callan. Improving query representations for dense retrieval with pseudo-relevance feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13454,
2021.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 29]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 29
[36] H Gharagozlou, J Mohammadzadeh, A Bastanfard, & S S Ghidary. RLAS-BIABC: A reinforcement learning-based answer selection using the BERT
model boosted by an improved ABC algorithm. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2022.
[37] H Schütze, C D Manning and P Raghavan. Introduction to information retrieval. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[38] H Touvron, T Lavril, G Izacard, X Martinet et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[39] H Touvron, L Martin, K Stone, P Albert et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[40] H Zamani, and W B Croft. On the theory of weak supervision for information retrieval. Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGIR international conference
on theory of information retrieval. 2018, 147-154.
[41] H Zamani, W B Croft, and J S Culpepper. Neural query performance prediction using weak supervision from multiple signals. The 41st International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval. 2018, 105-114.
[42] I Goodfellow, J Pouget-Abadie, M Mirza, B Xu, D Warde-Farley, S Ozair, A Courville, and Y Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Communications of
the ACM, 2020, 63(11): 139-144.
[43] I Jahan, M T R Laskar, C Peng, J X Huang. Evaluation of ChatGPT on biomedical tasks: A zero-shot comparison with fine-tuned generative
transformers. Proceedings of the 22nd Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing and BioNLP Shared Tasks. 2022, 326-336.
[44] J Devlin, M.W Chang, K Lee, and K Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. Proceedings of
the Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2019,
4171-4186.
[45] J Guo, Y Fan, X Ji, and X Cheng. Matchzoo: A learning, practicing, and developing system for neural text matching. In Proceedings of the 42nd
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2019, 1297-1300.
[46] J Guo, Y Fan, Q Ai, and W.B Croft. A deep relevance matching model for ad-hoc retrieval. Proceedings of the 25th ACM international on conference
on information and knowledge management. 2016, 55-64.
[47] J Guo, Y Fan, L Pang, L Yang, Q Ai, H Zamani, C Wu, W.B Croft, and Cheng X. A deep look into neural ranking models for information retrieval.
Information Processing & Management, 2020, 57(6), 102067.
[48] J Lee, W Yoon, S Kim, D Kim, S Kim, CH So, and J Kang. BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text
mining. Bioinformatics, 2020, 36(4), 1234-1240.
[49] J Lin, X Ma, SC Lin, JH Yang, R Pradeep and R Nogueira. Pyserini: An easy-to-use python toolkit to support replicable ir research with sparse and
dense representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10073, 2021.
[50] J Lin, R Nogueira, and A Yates. Pretrained transformers for text ranking: BERT and beyond. Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining. 2021.
[51] J Pennington, R Socher, and C D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word representation. Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing (EMNLP). 2014.
[52] J Lin, M Efron, Y Wang, and G Sherman. Overview of the TREC-2014 microblog track. Proceedings of the 23rd Text REtrieval Conference (TREC
2014).
[53] J Ponte and W B Croft. A language modeling approach to information retrieval. Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference,
1998, 275-281.
[54] J X Huang, F Peng, D Schuurmans, and N Cercone. Applying machine learning to text segmentation for information retrieval. Information Retrieval,
2003, 6(3), 333-362.
[55] J X Huang, and Q Hu. A bayesian learning approach to promoting diversity in ranking for biomedical information retrieval. Proceedings of the 32nd
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. 2009.
[56] J X Huang, M Zhong, and L Si. York University at TREC 2005: Genomics Track. TREC. 2005.
[57] J X Huang, J Miao, and B He. High performance query expansion using adaptive co-training. Information Processing Management, 2013, 49(2),
441-453.
[58] J Zhan, J Mao, Y Liu, M Zhang, and S Ma. RepBERT: Contextualized text embeddings for first-stage retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.15498, 2020.
[59] J Zhao, J X Huang, and Z Ye. Modeling term associations for probabilistic information retrieval. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS),
2014, 32(2), 1-47.
[60] J Zhao, J X Huang, and B He. CRTER: using cross terms to enhance probabilistic information retrieval. " Proceedings of the 34th international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in Information Retrieval. 2011.
[61] K D Onal, Y Zhang, I S Altingovde, M M Rahman, P Karagoz, A Braylan, B Dang, HL Chang, H Kim, Q McNamara, and A Angert. Neural information
retrieval: At the end of the early years. Information Retrieval Journal, 2018, 21(2), 111-182.
[62] K Clark, M T Luong, Q V Le, and C D Manning. ELECTRA: Pre-training text encoders as discriminators rather than generatorsg. Proceedings of
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
[63] K Hui, A Yates, K Berberich, and G Melo. "Co-PACRR: A context-aware neural IR model for ad-hoc retrieval. Proceedings of the 11th ACM
international conference on web search and data mining. 2018, 279-287.
[64] K Keyvan, and J X Huang. How to approach ambiguous queries in conversational search: A survey of techniques, approaches, tools, and challenges.
ACM Computing Surveys, 2022, vol. 55, no 6, p. 1-40.
[65] K Zhang, C Xiong, Z Liu, and Z Liu. Selective weak supervision for neural information retrieval. Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020. 2020,
474-485.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 30]
30 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
[66] L Dietz, M Verma, F Radlinski, and N Craswell. TREC complex answer retrieval overview. TREC. 2017.
[67] L Liu, M Li, J Lin, S Riedel, and P Stenetorp. Query expansion Using contextual clue sampling with language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07093,
2022.
[68] L Pang, Y Lan, J Guo, J Xu, S Wan, and X Cheng. Text matching as image recognition. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
2016: 2793-2799.
[69] L Xiong, C Xiong, Y Li, K Tang, and J Liu. Approximate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.00808, 2020.
[70] M Dehghani, A Severyn, S Rothe, and J Kamps. Learning to learn from weak supervision by full supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11383, 2017.
[71] M Ding, C Zhou, H Yang, and J Tang. Cogltx: Applying bert to long texts. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020, 33, 12792-12804.
[72] M Gaur, K Gunaratna, V Srinivasan, and H Jin. Iseeq: Information seeking question generation using dynamic meta-information retrieval and
knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022, 36(10): 10672-10680.
[73] M E Peters, M Neumann, M Iyyer, M Gardner. C Clark, K Lee, L Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representation. Proceedings of the Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2018, 2227-2237.
[74] M Li, and E Gaussier. KeyBLD: selecting key blocks with local pre-ranking for long document information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 44th
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2021, 2207-2211.
[75] M Li and E Gaussier. BERT-based dense intra-ranking and contextualized late interaction via multi-task learning for long document retrieval.
Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2022.
[76] M Lupu, J X Huang, J Zhu, and J Tait. TREC-CHEM: large scale chemical information retrieval evaluation at TREC. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGIR Forum. New York, 2009, 43(2), 63-70.
[77] M Lupu, J X Huang, J Zhu, and J Tait. Overview of the TREC 2009 Chemical IR Track. In : TREC. 2009.
[78] M Pan, J Wang, J X Huang, A J Huang, Q Chen, and J Chen. A probabilistic framework for integrating sentence-level semantics via BERT into
pseudo-relevance feedback. Information Processing & Management. 2022, 59(1), 102734.
[79] M Pan , Q Pei, Y Liu, T Li, E A Huang, J Wang, and J X Huang. SPRF: A semantic Pseudo-relevance Feedback enhancement for information retrieval
via ConceptNet. Knowledge-Based Systems, 274, 110602, 2023.
[80] M. T. R. Laskar, E. Hoque, & J. Huang. Query focused abstractive summarization via incorporating query relevance and transfer learning with
transformer models. In Advances in Artificial Intelligence: 33rd Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Canadian AI 2020, Ottawa, ON,
Canada, May 13–15, 2020, Proceedings 33 (pp. 342-348).
[81] M T R Laskar, M S Bari, M Rahman, M A H Bhuiyan, S Joty, and J X Huang. A systematic study and comprehensive evaluation of ChatGPT on
benchmark datasets. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: 431–469. ACL 2023.
[82] M T R Laskar, J X Huang, and E Hoque. Contextualized embeddings-based transformer encoder for sentence similarity modeling in answer selection
task. Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. 2020.
[83] M T R Laskar, E Hoque, and J X Huang . Domain adaptation with pre-trained transformers for query-focused abstractive text summarization.
Computational Linguistics, 2022, 48(2), 279-320.
[84] M T R Laskar, E Hoque, and J X Huang . WSL-DS: Weakly Supervised Learning with Distant Supervision for Query-Focused Multi-Document
Abstractive Summarization. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2020, 5647-5654.
[85] M Yan, C Li, C Wu, B Bi, W Wang, J Xia, and L Si. IDST at TREC 2019 deep learning track: deep cascade ranking with generation-based document
expansion and pre-trained language modeling. TREC. 2019.
[86] N Reimers, and I Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese BERT-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
[87] O Khattab, and M Zaharia. ColBERT: Efficient and effective passage search via contextualized late interaction over BERT. In Proceedings of the 43rd
International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval. 2020, 39-48.
[88] OpenAI, R. "GPT-4 technical report. " arXiv (2023): 2303-08774.
[89] P Lewis, E Perez, A Piktus, F Petroni et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2020, 33, 9459-9474.
[90] P S Huang, X He, J Gao, L Deng, A Acero, and L Heck. Learning deep structured semantic models for web search using clickthrough data. Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM international conference on Information & Knowledge Management, 2013, 2333-2338.
[91] P Shi, and J Lin. Cross-lingual relevance transfer for document retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02989, 2019.
[92] P Punyani, R Gupta, and A Kumar. Neural networks for facial age estimation: a survey on recent advances. Artificial Intelligence Review, 2020, 53(5),
3299-3347.
[93] P Xu, X Ma, R Nallapati, and B Xiang. Passage ranking with weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05910, 2019.
[94] P Yang, H Fang, and J Lin. Anserini: Enabling the use of lucene for information retrieval research. In Proceedings of the 40th international ACM
SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval, 2017, 1253-1256.
[95] Q Chen, Q Hu, J X Huang, L He, and W An. Enhancing recurrent neural networks with positional attention for question answering. Proceedings of
the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2017.
[96] R Anil, AM Dai, O Firat, M Johnson, D Lepikhin et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
[97] R Padaki, Z Dai, and J Callan. Rethinking query expansion for BERT reranking. European conference on information retrieval. Springer, Cham, 2020,
297-304.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 31]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 31
[98] R Nogueira, J Lin, and A I Epistemic. From doc2query to docTTTTTquery. Online preprint, 2019.
[99] R Nogueira, and K Cho. Passage Re-ranking with BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04085, 2019.
[100] R Nogueira, W Yang, K Cho, and J Lin. Multi-stage document ranking with BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08375, 2019.
[101] R Nogueira, W Yang, J Lin, and K Cho. Document expansion by query prediction. ArXiv: 1904.08375, 2019.
[102] R Sennrich, H Barry, and B Alexandra. “Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units. " arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909, 2015.
[103] R Zhu, X Tu, and J X Huang. Deep learning on information retrieval and its applications. In : Deep learning for data analytics. Academic Press,
2020. p. 125-153.
[104] S C Lin, J H Yang, and J Lin. Distilling dense representations for ranking using tightly-coupled teachers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11386, 2020.
[105] S Hofstätter, M Zlabinger, and A Hanbury. TU Wien TREC Deep Learning’19–Simple Contextualization for Re-ranking. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.01385, 2019.
[106] S Hofstätter, M Zlabinger, and A Hanbury. Interpretable & time-budget-constrained contextualization for re-ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.01854,
2020.
[107] S Hofstätter, H Zamani, B Mitra, N Craswell, and A Hanbury. Local self-attention over long text for efficient document retrieval. Proceedings of the
43rd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2020), 2020, 2021-2024.
[108] S Hofstätter, S C Lin, J H Yang, J Lin, and A Hanbury. Efficiently teaching an effective dense retriever with balanced topic aware sampling.
Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2021, 113-122.
[109] S Hofstätter, B Mitra, H Zamani, N Craswell, and A Hanbury. Intra-Document Cascading: Learning to select passages for neural document ranking.
Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2021, 1349-1358.
[110] S MacAvaney. OpenNIR: A complete neural ad-hoc ranking pipeline. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining, 2020, 845-848.
[111] S MacAvaney, F M Nardini, R Perego, N Tonellotto, N Goharian, and O Frieder. Expansion via prediction of importance with contextualization. In
Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval. 2020, 1573-1576.
[112] S MacAvaney, A Yates, A Cohan, and N Goharian. CEDR: Contextualized embeddings for document ranking. Proceedings of the 42nd international
ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval, 2019, 1101-1104. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331317.
[113] S Macavaney, F M Nardini, R Perego, N Tonellotto, N Goharian, and O Frieder. Training curricula for open domain answer re-ranking. In Proceedings
of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2020, 529-538.
[114] S Naseri, J Dalton, A Yates, and J Allan. CEQE: Contextualized embeddings for query expansion. European Conference on Information Retrieval.
Springer, Cham, 2021, 467-482.
[115] S Robertson and H Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 2009,
3(4), 333-389.
[116] S Wang, S Zhuang, and G Zuccon. BERT-based dense retrievers require interpolation with BM25 for effective passage retrieval. Proceedings of the
2021 ACM SIGIR International Conference on Theory of Information Retrieval, 2021, 317-324. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3471158.3472233.
[117] S Wan, Y Lan, J Xu, J Guo, L Pang, and X Cheng. Match-SRNN: modeling the recursive matching structure with spatial RNN. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2016, 2922-2928.
[118] S Wan, Y Lan, J Guo, J Xu, L Pang, and X Cheng. A deep architecture for semantic matching with multiple positional sentence representations.
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2016, 30(1).
[119] S Zhang, L Yao, A Sun, and Y Tay. Deep learning based recommender system: A survey and new perspectives. ACM computing surveys (CSUR),
2019, 52(1), 1-38.
[120] T Brown, B Mann, N Ryder, M Subbiah, JD Kaplan, P Dhariwal, A Neelakantan, P Shyam et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2020, 33, 1877-1901.
[121] T Formal, B Piwowarski, and S Clinchant. SPLADE: Sparse lexical and expansion model for first stage ranking. Proceedings of the 44th International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2021, 2288-2292.
[122] T Mikolov, K Chen, G Corrado and J Dean. "Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. " arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
[123] T Nguyen, M Rosenberg, X Song, J Guo, S Tiwary, R Majumder, and L Deng. MS MARCO: A human generated machine reading comprehension
dataset. Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Computation: Integrating neural and symbolic approaches 2016 co-located with the 30th Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016.
[124] V Karpukhin, B O ˘𝑔uz, S Min, P Lewis, L Wu, S Edunov, D Chen, and W Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering.
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
[125] V Sanh, L Debut, J Chaumond and T Wolf. DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108,
2019.
[126] W.B Croft, D Metzler, and T Strohman. Search Engines: Information Retrieval in Practice. Reading: Addison-Wesley, 2010.
[127] W Liu, Z Wang, X Liu, N Zeng, Y Liu, and F E Alsaadi. A survey of deep neural network architectures and their applications. Neurocomputing,
2017, 234: 11-26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2016.12.038
[128] W Liu, P Zhou, Z Zhao, Z Wang, H Deng, and Q Ju. FastBERT: a self-distilling BERT with adaptive inference time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02178,
2020.
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 32]
32 J. Wang, J. X. Huang, X. Tu, J. Wang, A. J. Huang, M. T. R. Laskar and A. Bhuiyan
[129] W Lu, J Jiao, and R Zhang. Twinbert: Distilling knowledge to twin-structured compressed bert models for large-scale retrieval. Proceedings of the
29th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 2020, 2645-2652.
[130] W Sun, L Yan, X Ma, P Ren, D Yin, and Z Ren. Is ChatGPT Good at Search? Investigating Large Language Models as Re-Ranking Agent. arXivpreprint
arXiv:2304.09542 , 2023.
[131] W Wang, B Bi, M Yan, C Wu, Z Bao, J Xia, L Peng , and Si L. StructBERT: Incorporating language structures into pre-training for deep language
understanding. ArXiv: 1908.04577, 2019.
[132] W Yang, H Zhang, and J Lin. Simple applications of BERT for ad hoc document retrieval. ArXiv: 1903.10972, 2019.
[133] X Jiao, Y Yin, L Shang, X Jiang, X Chen, L Li, F Wang, and Q Liu. TinyBERT: Distilling BERT for natural language understanding. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, 4163-4174.
[134] X Wang, Macdonald C, N Tonellotto, and I Ounis. Pseudo-relevance feedback for multiple representation dense retrieval. Proceedings of the 2021
ACM SIGIR International Conference on Theory of Information Retrieval. 2021, 297-306.
[135] X Yin, J X Huang, Z Li and X Zhou. A survival modeling approach to biomedical search result diversification using Wikipedia. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge & Data Engineering, 2013, 25(06), 1201-1212.
[136] X Zhang, A Yates, and J Lin. Comparing score aggregation approaches for document retrieval with pretrained transformers. European Conference
on Information Retrieval. Springer, Cham, 2021, 150-163.
[137] Y Bai, X Li, G Wang, C Zhang, L Shang, J Xu, Z Wang, F Wang, and Q Liu. SparTerm: learning term-based sparse representation for fast text
retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00768, 2020.
[138] Y Cui, W Che, T Liu, B Qin, S Wang, and G Hu. Revisiting pre-trained models for Chinese natural language processing. Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Findings. 2020, 657-668.
[139] Y Lecun, Y Bengio, and G Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 2015, 521(7553), 436-444. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539.
[140] Y Liu, J X Huang, A An, and X Yu. ARSA: a sentiment-aware model for predicting sales performance using blogs. Proceedings of the 30th annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. 2007.
[141] Y Liu, M Ott, N Goyal, J F Du, M Joshi, D Q Chen, O Levy, M Lewis, Zettlemoyer L, and Stoyanov V. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT
pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019
[142] Y Luan, J Eisenstein, K Toutanova, and M Collins. Sparse, dense, and attentional representations for text retrieval, Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2021, 9, 329-345.
[143] Y Wu, M Schuster, Z Chen, Q V.Le, and M Norouzi. Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.
[144] Z A Yilmaz, S Wang, W Yang, H Zhang, and J Lin. Applying BERT to document retrieval with birch. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP).
2019, 19-24.
[145] Z A Yilmaz, W Yang, H Zhang, and J Lin. Cross-domain sentence modeling for relevance transfer with BERT. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
2019.
[146] Z Dai, Z Yang, Y Yang, J Carbonell, Q Le, and R Salakhutdinov. Transformer-XL: Attention language models beyond a fixed-length comtext.
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 2019, 2978-2988.
[147] Z Dai, and J Callan. Deeper text understanding for IR with contextual neural language modeling. Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2019, 985-988.
[148] Z Dai, and J Callan. Context-aware passage term weighting for first stage retrieval. Proceedings of the 43rd international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in information retrieval 2020, 1533-1536.
[149] Z Dai, and J Callan. Context-aware document term weighting for ad-hoc search. Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020. 2020, 1897-1907.
[150] Z Dai, C Xiong, J Callan, and Z Liu. Convolutional neural networks for soft-matching n-grams in ad-hoc search. Proceedings of the eleventh ACM
international conference on web search and data mining. 2018, 126-134.
[151] Z Lan, M Chen, S Goodman, K Gimpel, P Sharma, and R Soricut. AlBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language representations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942, 2019.
[152] Z Liu, K Zhang, C Xiong, Z Liu, and M Sun. OpenMatch: An open source library for Neu-IR research. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2021, 2531-2535.
[153] Z Qin, R Jagerman, K Hui, H Zhuang, J Wu, J Shen, T Liu, J Liu, D Metzler, X Wang et al. Large Language Models are Effective Text Rankers with
Pairwise Ranking Prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17563, 2023.
[154] Z Wu, J Mao, Y Liu, J Zhan, Y Zheng, M Zhang, and S Ma. Leveraging passage-level cumulative gain for document ranking. Proceedings of The
Web Conference 2020. 2020, 2421-2431.
[155] Z Yang, Z Dai, Y Yang, and J Carbonell. XLNET: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. Proceedings of Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019 (32), 5753-5763.
[156] Z Ye, J X Huang, and H Lin. Finding a good query-related topic for boosting pseudo-relevance feedback. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 2011, 62(4), 748-760,
Manuscript submitted to ACM

[PAGE 33]
Utilizing BERT for Information Retrieval: Survey, Applications, Resources, and Challenges 33
[157] Z Zheng, K Hui, B He, X Han, L Sun, and A Yates. BERT-QE: contextualized query expansion for document re-ranking. http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.07258,
2020.
Manuscript submitted to ACM