[PAGE 1]
GPT-4 AS EV ALUA TOR: EV ALUA TING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS ON PEST
MANAGEMENT IN AGRICULTURE
Shanglong Yang, Zhipeng Yuan, Shunbao Li, Ruoling Peng, Kang Liu, Po Yang*
ABSTRACT
In the rapidly evolving field of artificial intelligence (AI), the application of large language models (LLMs) in agriculture,
particularly in pest management, remains nascent. We aimed to prove the feasibility by evaluating the content of the pest
management advice generated by LLMs, including the Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) series from OpenAI and
the FLAN series from Google. Considering the context-specific properties of agricultural advice, automatically measuring or
quantifying the quality of text generated by LLMs becomes a significant challenge. We proposed an innovative approach, using
GPT-4 as an evaluator, to score the generated content on Coherence, Logical Consistency, Fluency, Relevance, Comprehensibility, and Exhaustiveness. Additionally, we integrated an expert system based on crop threshold data as a baseline to obtain
scores for Factual Accuracy on whether pests found in crop fields should take management action. Each model’s score was
weighted by percentage to obtain a final score. The results showed that GPT-3.4 and GPT-4 outperform the FLAN models in
most evaluation categories. Furthermore, the use of instruction-based prompting containing domain-specific knowledge proved
the feasibility of LLMs as an effective tool in agriculture, with an accuracy rate of 72%, demonstrating LLMs’ effectiveness in
providing pest management suggestions.
Index Terms— Large Language Model, Prompt Engineering, Large Language Model Evaluation, Agriculture, Pest Management
1. INTRODUCTION
Language models (LMs), as computer algorithms or systems, are capable of understanding and generating human language,
contributing a core component of the field of natural language processing (NLP) [1]. Language models are trained on a vast
corpus of text data [2], enabling the model to capture word order or contextual associations, which allows the model to predict the next word or a sequence of words based on a particular probability distribution given an input [2, 3, 4]. LLMs are
sophisticated LMs with a considerably larger scale, encompassing billions or hundreds of billions of parameters, and are typically founded upon deep learning methodologies [1]. In contrast to standard LMs, LLMs necessitate massive data for training,
thereby enabling LLMs with a broad expanse of knowledge and generalization capabilities. LLMs exhibit enhanced adaptability
to a diverse range of tasks and domains [5, 6]. Large, pre-trained language models (PLMs) like BERT (Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers) and GPT have significantly altered the NLP landscape, delivering state-of-the-art results
across various tasks [7]. Traditional NLP methods require handcrafted features and task-specific training, whereas PLMs use a
generic latent feature representation learned from extensive training on a wide range of texts adapted for specific NLP tasks [7].
LLMs such as GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 have demonstrated remarkable capabilities as general-purpose computational tools, conditioned by natural language instructions. The efficacy of these models in task performance is substantially contingent upon the
quality of prompts used to guide them. Notably, most effective prompts are crafted manually by humans [8]. Prompt engineering emerges as a pivotal area within AI, dedicated to optimising prompts to proficiently direct AI models, particularly those
grounded in machine learning and NLP. The emerging research domain includes the design, refinement, and implementation of
prompts or instructions that steer the output of LLMs, facilitating the completion of diverse tasks.
Generally, LLMs are pre-trained on a massive corpus of unlabeled data to capture a broad understanding of language and
knowledge. Followed by small fine-tuning, LLMs are adapted to task-specific datasets to particular applications of interest
[9]. Consequently, identifying appropriate evaluation metrics for LLMs across diverse domains has emerged as a novel and
significant research theme. Due to the efficiency in understanding and generating human language, LLMs have been applied
across various domains, including finance, medicine and education. However, their adoption in agriculture has been limited,
constrained by the field’s specialized nature and the paucity of research exploring their potential in this area.
The main contributions of our paper can be summarized as follows:
arXiv:2403.11858v1 [cs.CL] 18 Mar 2024

[PAGE 2]
1. Feasibility Study of LLMs for Pest Management Advice Generation in Agriculture: We demonstrate the viability of
LLMs in the agricultural pest management domain.
2. Innovative Evaluation Methodology: We introduce a novel approach using GPT-4 for multi-dimensional assessment of
generated pest management suggestions.
3. Effective Application of Instruction-Based Prompting Techniques: Our findings highlight a 72% accuracy in LLMdriven pest management decisions through instruction-based prompting that incorporates domain-specific knowledge.
4. Nuanced Differences Between GPT-3.5 and GPT-4: Our research uncovers subtle differences between GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4 in decision-making on pest management, emphasizing the importance of model selection in agricultural contexts.
2. RELA TED WORK
2.1. Application of LLMs
“FinBERT” is a LM tailored in financial domain, a variant of the BERT model where lies in the specialized pre-training on
financial texts, enabling the adaptability to handle the distinctive language and expressions prevalent in the financial sector.
“FinBERT” has been applied for financial text mining [10], financial sentiment analysis [11], and financial communications
[12]. However, the specialization of “FinBERT” is limit on effectiveness in domains outside of finance as the model’s performance is highly dependent on the quality and representativeness of the financial corpus used for training [10, 11, 12]. Beyond
“FinBERT”, Xiao-Yang et al. [13] have introduced “FinGPT”, a novel model based on the transformer architecture, aimed
at enhancing the applicability of LLMs in the financial domain. “FinGPT” addresses the limitations in data acquisition and
processing faced by traditional financial LLMs by automating the collection of real-time financial data from the Internet. In
evaluating LLMs in educational domains, Kung et al. [14] demonstrated that ChatGPT could achieve scores at or near the passing threshold for all three components of the United States Medical Licensing Exam without specific training or reinforcement,
underscoring the potential of LLMs to support medical education and possibly influence clinical decision-making processes.
Similarly, Thirunavukarasu et al. [15] discussed the use of LLMs in healthcare, which covered development and applications
in clinics. The review guides clinicians on using LLM technology for patient and practitioner benefits.
In agriculture, Dr Som [16] explored the potential applications of OpenAI’s LLM, ChatGPT. Specifically, the paper discusses using ChatGPT across various agricultural tasks, including crop forecasting, soil analysis, crop disease and pest identification. Dr Som highlights that ChatGPT exhibits professional competence in analyzing agricultural data to generate accurate
and timely reports, alerts, and insights, facilitate informed decision-making, and enhance customer service. However, it is noted
that ChatGPT’s predictions’ accuracy relies heavily on input data quality. Inaccurate, biased, or incomplete data can significantly impact the model’s outputs. Moreover, AI systems like ChatGPT can assist decision-making but are not a substitute for
human intuition and experience in complex agricultural environments [16]. Besides, Silva et al. [17] evaluate the capability of
LLMs, including GPT-4, GPT-3.5, and Llama2, in responding to agriculturally-related queries. The queries were sourced from
agricultural examinations and datasets from the United States, Brazil, and India. The study assessed the accuracy of answers
produced by LLMs, the effectiveness of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and ensemble refinement (ER) techniques, and
the comparative performance against human respondents. Silva et al. [17] discovered that in various tasks, GPT-4 performed
better than GPT-3.5 and Llama2, achieving an impressive 93% accuracy rate in the certified crop adviser (CCA) exam. Additionally, in the study by Jiajun et al. [18], the application of LLMs, particularly GPT-4, in agriculture for pest and disease
diagnosis is explored. Jiajun [18] introduces a novel approach that combines the deep logical reasoning capabilities of GPT-4
with the visual comprehension abilities of the You Only Look Once (YOLO) network. The paper evaluates the YOLO-PC, a
new lightweight variant of YOLO, using metrics such as accuracy rate (94.5%) and reasoning accuracy (90% for agricultural
diagnostic reports), assessing the quality of model-generated text in correlation with the recognized information [18].
2.2. Prompt & Prompt Engineering
Prompts are a mechanism for interaction with large language models (LLMs) to accomplish specific tasks [19]. Prompts act as
essentially instructions directed towards LLMs, comprise the input provided by users and guide the model to generate answers
for the response [20]. The nature of the inputs are vary, encompassing explanations, queries, or any other form of input,
contingent upon the intended application of the model [19]. In contrast to traditional supervised learning, where models are
trained to predict output from input using a probability distribution, prompt-based learning operates on LLMs that directly
model textual probabilities. Prompt-based learning involves modifying the original input into a text string prompt with unfilled
slots using templates. Subsequently, prompts are populated using the probabilistic capabilities of the LLM to generate the final

[PAGE 3]
string [21]. Essentially, prompt engineering represents a practice of engaging effectively with AI systems to optimise the utility
[22]. In addition, prompt engineering has been applied in various domains such as medical [22, 23, 24], generative art [25],
multilingual legal judgment prediction [26], and the extraction of accurate materials data [27].
As delineated in the “Prompt Engineering Guide [28]”, constructing an effective prompt can involve integrating four elements or a combination: Instruction, Context, Input Data and Output Indicator. Instruction refers to a specific task or directive to
guide the model to perform a designated operation. Context encompasses providing supplementary information or background,
instrumental in steering the model towards more accurate responses. Input Data pertains to the specific question or input content
the model solicits to respond to. Lastly, the Output Indicator concerns the desired type or format of the model’s output.
The iterative development process also outlined four prompt guidelines [29]:
• Be clear and specific: The prompts should be unambiguous and detailed enough to guide the model precisely towards the
intended task or output.
• Analyze why the result does not give the desired output: If the output from the prompt does not meet expectations, it is
crucial to analyze the reasons behind the discrepancy.
• Refine the idea and the prompt: Based on the analysis, adjustments should be made to both the underlying idea and the
wording or structure of the prompt to improve results.
• Repeat: The process is not linear but cyclical, after refining, the new prompt is tested, and the cycle of analysis and
refinement continues until the desired outcome is achieved.
3. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
3.1. Experiment Models
This section provides an overview of the two LLMs evaluated in the experiment: Section 3.1.1 covers the GPT series from
OpenAI, specifically GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, while Section 3.1.2 describes the FLAN-T5 model developed by Google.
3.1.1. GPT
The transformer architecture, proposed by Vaswani et al. in the paper “Attention is All You Need” [30], became the cornerstone
for the GPT [31, 32]. The OpenAI GPT model, introduced in the paper ”Improving Language Understanding by Generative PreTraining” [33], undergoes pre-training through language modelling on a substantial dataset to capture long-range dependencies
within the text. Due to the GPT model’s advanced capability to understand and generate human-like text [34], it becomes an
ideal choice for exploring complex agriculture tasks and serves as the experimental model. Specifically, the GPT-3.5 (Model:
‘gpt-3.5-turbo-0125’) and GPT-4 (Model: ‘gpt-4-1106-preview’) models were used in the experiments.
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 are successive generations of artificial intelligence language models developed by OpenAI. The GPT-3.5
model is proficient in understanding and generating natural language or code and has been optimized specifically for chat-based
interactions through the Chat Completion API. However, it remains applicable to non-chat tasks. The GPT-4 model, as a large
multi-modal model, exhibits a broader comprehension of general knowledge and reasoning capabilities, enabling it to solve
complex problems with greater accuracy compared to GPT-3.5 and its predecessors [35].
3.1.2. FLAN-T5
The T5 model significantly advances natural language processing through its novel unified framework. T5 converts all language
problems into a text-to-text format, facilitating extensive exploration of transfer learning techniques. Employing a combination
of supervised and self-supervised training methods, including a novel use of corrupted tokens for pre-training, T5 sets new
benchmarks across a range of NLP tasks by leveraging its encoder-decoder architecture and the extensive “Colossal Clean
Crawled Corpus” [36]. FLAN-T5 is an evolution of the original T5 model, which was fine-tuned on over a thousand additional tasks and expanded language coverage. FLAN-T5 significantly enhances performance and versatility, even in few-shot
scenarios, achieving state-of-the-art results on various benchmarks [37].
The FLAN-T5 model is available in various sizes, including Small, Base, Large, XL, and XXL, with the XXL version being
the largest, encompassing 11 billion parameters. Unlike the GPT model, FLAN models require downloading the checkpoints
locally to generate the response. Given the considerations for computational speed and memory constraints, the FLAN-T5XL variant is selected as a more practical option for experimental use containing 3 billion parameters. The pre-trained model

[PAGE 4]
“google/flan-t5-xl” weights and configuration are loaded using the transformers library. The weights and configurations
are based on the previously saved checkpoint containing all the model parameters.
3.2. Baselines
This section elucidates the methodology for generating labelled samples used to construct pest scenarios based on the expert
system. To assess the ability of LLMs to determine whether specific pest scenarios necessitate action, a baseline of labelled
samples is essential. Section 3.2.1 delineates the composition of the expert system, including four data files, while Section 3.2.2
elaborates on the process of generating labelled samples from the expert system’s data for the construction of pest scenarios.
3.2.1. Expert System
As the baseline for this experiment, an Expert System is used to evaluate the Factual Accuracy of three different Large Language
Models (LLMs) below on whether pests found in the crop fields necessitate management actions. The Expert System comprises
four datasets extracted from the AHDB’s Encyclopaedia of Pests and Natural Enemies in Field Crops [38]. These datasets
include two in structured data ‘JSON’ format: ‘pest to affected crop.json’ and ‘pest to threshold.json’ and two in ‘XLSX’
format ‘thresholds database.xlsx’ and ‘pestto management.xlsx’.
• File ‘pest to affected crop.json’summarises various pests and the crops. It lists different types of pests where each pest
is associated with one or more crops.
• File ‘pest to threshold.json’provides information on the thresholds for pests, specifying when action should be taken
to manage them. Each entry includes the pest name and a threshold description, which details the criteria for deciding
when to take action, such as the temperature, location, plant stages, pest density levels and the extent of crop damage.
• File ‘thresholds database.xlsx’features a first column listing the names of pests, with other columns containing threshold information extracted from the file ‘pest to threshold.json’. The threshold includes pest density metrics such as ‘per
square meter’, ‘per plant’, ‘leaf area eaten’, ‘per trap’, ‘of petioles damaged’, ‘of plants are infested’, ‘of tillers infested’,
‘per pheromone trap’, ‘per ear’, ‘per trap on two consecutive occasions’, ‘per yellow sticky trap’, and ‘per gram of soil’.
• File ‘pest to management.xlsx’has two columns, the first listing the names of pests and the second detailing management suggestions for Non-chemical control solutions that meet the criteria for affected plants and thresholds achieved.
Notably, the Expert System is designed to output Non-chemical control solutions only when all specified conditions are
met, defined as action is necessitated.
As the benchmark for Factual Accuracy, the Expert System is not engaged in evaluating the accuracy, being designated as
unequivocally 100% accurate. Only the outputs, Non-chemical control solutions, from expert systems are subject to evaluation
by GPT-4, focusing on Coherence, Logical Consistency, Fluency, Relevance, Comprehensibility, and Exhaustiveness.
3.2.2. Generation of Input Samples from Expert System
Figure 1 shows the process for generating labelled pest samples. Files ‘pest to affected crop.json’, ‘thresholdsdatabase.xlsx’,
and ‘pest to management.xlsx’ are used for the generation of labelled pest samples, serving as inputs for constructing prompts
for LLMs. Although the data across these files are indexed by pest name, variations exist in the pests included due to the
differing extraction methods employed from the AHDB database [38]. By querying pests of the same species, 25 types of pests,
along with their affected crops, thresholds and Non-chemical control solutions, have been extracted.
The ‘generate densities’ function provides a mechanism for determining ‘true’ and ‘false’ density values. By iterating
through a list of density-related columns in file ‘thresholdsdatabase.xlsx’, the function searches for non-null entries that signify
recorded density thresholds. When encountering a valid density value, the function performs a series of operations to cleanse
and standardize the data, including removing percentage symbols or relational operators. Subsequently, the numerical density
value is manipulated to generate a series of ‘true’ densities, inflating the original value by adding a random integer ranging from
1 to 10 to simulate density conditions exceeding the threshold for pest management action. Conversely, ‘false’ densities are
generated by subtracting a random integer from the original value, ensuring the resultant value does not fall below zero. These
reduced values represent conditions below the pest management threshold, indicating no action is needed. The generated ‘true’
and ‘false’ density values are then appended with the original measurement metric (e.g., ‘per plant’, ‘per square meter’) and a
percentage symbol if the original value was expressed as a percentage.

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: • | File ‘pest to affected crop.json’ summarises various pests and the crops. It lists different types of pests where each pest
Row 1: •: | File ‘pest to affected crop.json’ summarises various pests and the crops. It lists different types of pests where each pest: is associated with one or more crops.
Row 2: •: • | File ‘pest to affected crop.json’ summarises various pests and the crops. It lists different types of pests where each pest: File ‘pest to threshold.json’ provides information on the thresholds for pests, specifying when action should be taken
Row 3: •: | File ‘pest to affected crop.json’ summarises various pests and the crops. It lists different types of pests where each pest: to manage them. Each entry includes the pest name and a threshold description, which details the criteria for deciding
Row 4: •: | File ‘pest to affected crop.json’ summarises various pests and the crops. It lists different types of pests where each pest: when to take action, such as the temperature, location, plant stages, pest density levels and the extent of crop damage.
Row 5: •: • | File ‘pest to affected crop.json’ summarises various pests and the crops. It lists different types of pests where each pest: File ‘thresholds database.xlsx’ features a first column listing the names of pests, with other columns containing thresh-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
Data Extraction and Indexing
thresholds_database.xlsx
Generate True (exceeding
threshold) and False (below
threshold) density values by
manipulating the original density
values with random integers.
Density Values Generation
thresholds_database.xlsx
pest_to_management.xlsx pest_to_affected_crop.json
Query and extract pests by indexing pest names, obtaining 25 pests with their affected crops,
thresholds, and non-chemical control solutions.
25 Pests
Affected Crops Generation
pest_to_affected_crop.json
True Densities
False Densities
True Crops
False Crops
Samples
Generation
Pest Name: …
True Crops: …
False Crops: …
True Densities: …
False Densities: …
Control Solutions: …
Random Temperature
Random Location
1. Generate Positive Samples (1) by pairing True
crops with True density values.
2. Generate Negative Samples (0) by either pairing
True crops with False densities or False crops with
any density values.
3. Augment samples with random temperature and
latitude parameters.
4. Randomly select one positive (labelled 1) and
one negative (labelled 0) sample for each pest,
resulting to a total of 50 samples for experiment.
Positive Samples (1):
True Crops + True Densities
Negative Samples (0):
True Crops + False Densities
False Crops + True Densities
False Crops + False Densities
Positive Sample
Pest Name: …
Crop: …
Density: …
Temperature: …
Location: …
Label: 1
Negative Sample
Pest: …
Crop: …
Density: …
Temperature: …
Location: …
Label: 0
Generate True (crops affected by
the pest) and False (crops
unaffected by the pest) crops by
classifying the data file
pest_to_affected_crop.json.
Fig. 1: Generation of Input Samples from Expert System. This image outlines a process for generating labelled pest samples,
detailing steps from data extraction and indexing of pests, through generating true and false density values and crops, to the
creation of positive and negative samples for experiment.
The core of the sample generation process is to create the combinations that represent an action that is needed (labelled
as ‘1’) and not needed (labelled as ‘0’) for various pest conditions. This bifurcation is achieved by deliberately pairing crops
and pest density values under varying conditions. Positive samples are formulated by coupling ‘true’ crops (crops affected
by the pest) with ‘true’ density values. Conversely, negative samples emerge from the strategies: pairing ‘true’ crops with
‘false’ densities and ‘false’ crops (crops unaffected by the pest) with either ‘true’ or ‘false’ densities. These combinations are
augmented with randomly generated temperature and latitude location parameters to diversify the dataset further.
Considering computational resources and experimental costs, also ensuring an even distribution of positive and negative
samples, one positive sample (labelled as ‘1’) and one negative sample (labelled as ‘0’) are randomly selected for each of the
25 pest types. Eventually, a total of 50 samples are generated for experimentation. The samples are indexed in pest names,
with other columns containing crops, pest density, temperature and location. Among these, crops and pest density determine
the label as 1 or 0, whereas temperature and location only enrich the scene and do not affect the label.
3.3. Experiment Prompting
This section lists the prompts constructed using different techniques in the experiment. Four prompt techniques: zero-shot
prompting described in Section 3.3.1, few-shot prompting in Section 3.3.2, instruction-based prompting in Section 3.3.3, and
self-consistency prompting in Section 3.3.4, incorporate samples of pest scenarios generated in Section 3.2.2 into prompts.
These prompts serve as inputs for LLMs to generate responses, which are then evaluated.
3.3.1. Zero-shot Prompting
Zero-shot prompting refers to providing instructions or requests to LLMs without needing prior examples or contextual information. Zero-shot prompting necessitates the ability of the model to comprehend and respond to tasks or queries not directly
encountered before [39]. The model relies on the extensive knowledge and understanding acquired during the training phase
for zero-shot prompting. For instance, when posed with a question that has not previously been addressed, the model can still
understand and attempt to provide an answer [40].

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: Data Extraction and Indexing | Density Values Generation | Affected Crops Generation
Row 1: Data Extraction and Indexing: | Density Values Generation: Generate True (exceeding | Affected Crops Generation: Generate True (crops affected by
Row 2: Data Extraction and Indexing: Query and extract pests by indexing pest names, obtaining 25 pests with their affected crops, | Density Values Generation: | Affected Crops Generation:
Row 3: Data Extraction and Indexing: | Density Values Generation: threshold) and False (below | Affected Crops Generation: the pest) and False (crops
Row 4: Data Extraction and Indexing: thresholds, and non-chemical control solutions. | Density Values Generation: | Affected Crops Generation:
Row 5: Data Extraction and Indexing: | Density Values Generation: threshold) density values by | Affected Crops Generation: unaffected by the pest) crops by
Row 6: Data Extraction and Indexing: | Density Values Generation: manipulating the original density | Affected Crops Generation: classifying the data file
Row 7: Data Extraction and Indexing: | Density Values Generation: values with random integers. | Affected Crops Generation: pest_to_affected_crop.json.
Row 8: Data Extraction and Indexing: thresholds_database.xlsx pest_to_management.xlsx pest_to_affected_crop.json | Density Values Generation: | Affected Crops Generation:
Row 9: Data Extraction and Indexing: | Density Values Generation: thresholds_database.xlsx | Affected Crops Generation: pest_to_affected_crop.json
Row 10: Data Extraction and Indexing: | Density Values Generation: True Densities | Affected Crops Generation: True Crops
Row 11: Data Extraction and Indexing: 25 Pests | Density Values Generation: False Densities | Affected Crops Generation: False Crops
Row 12: Data Extraction and Indexing: | Density Values Generation: | Affected Crops Generation: Positive Sample
Row 13: Data Extraction and Indexing: Pest Name: ... | Density Values Generation: | Affected Crops Generation: Pest Name: ...
Row 14: Data Extraction and Indexing: 1. Generate Positive Samples (1) by pairing True True Crops: ... | Density Values Generation: | Affected Crops Generation: Crop: ...
Row 15: Data Extraction and Indexing: crops with True density values. False Crops: ... | Density Values Generation: Positive Samples (1): | Affected Crops Generation: Density: ...
Row 16: Data Extraction and Indexing: 2. Generate Negative Samples (0) by either pairing True Densities: ... | Density Values Generation: True Crops + True Densities | Affected Crops Generation: Temperature: ...
Row 17: Data Extraction and Indexing: True crops with False densities or False crops with False Densities: ... | Density Values Generation: | Affected Crops Generation: Location: ...
Row 18: Data Extraction and Indexing: Samples any density values. Control Solutions: ... | Density Values Generation: Negative Samples (0): | Affected Crops Generation: Label: 1
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
For zero-shot prompting, 50 input samples are iteratively filled into the following prompt template via a loop: I discovered
{Pest} in my {Crop}, with a density of {Density}. The temperature was {Temperature}, and the location was at {Location}.
Could you please provide some control and management suggestions? This prompt is then input into a GPT or FLAN model.
3.3.2. Few-shot Prompting
In contrast to zero-shot prompting, few-shot prompting provides relevant examples to guide the model to understand and
execute a task. Few-shot prompting can be employed to facilitate in-context learning, where demonstrations in the prompt
guide the model towards enhanced performance [41]. According to Min et al. [42], in the context of few-shot learning, both the
label space and the distribution of the input text defined by the demonstrations are crucial for performance, irrespective of the
accuracy of individual labels. Additionally, the format of the demonstrations, including random labels, significantly influences
effectiveness, which is better than not using any labels.
The core of the few-shot learning approach is encapsulated within a create_prompt function. The function filters 50
input samples to select only samples with a label of ‘1’ and a pest different from the current input pest. It randomly selects
three samples and constructs a few-shot prompt containing questions and answers. Each question is formulated from the pest,
crop, density, temperature, and location of the selected input samples, same as the zero-shot prompting template, followed by
the respective Non-chemical control solutions from file ‘pest to management.xlsx’. Finally, the prompt adds a new question
using the current input sample without providing an answer. The template of the few-shot prompt is shown below:
Question: I discovered {Pest 1} in my {Crop 1}, with a density of {Density 1}. The temperature was {Temperature 1}, and the
location was at {Location 1}. Could you please provide some control and management suggestions?
Answer: {Non-chemical control solutions for Pest 1}
Question: I discovered {Pest 2} in my {Crop 2}, with a density of {Density 2}. The temperature was {Temperature 2}, and the
location was at {Location 2}. Could you please provide some control and management suggestions?
Answer: {Non-chemical control solutions for Pest 2}
Question: I discovered {Pest 3} in my {Crop 3}, with a density of {Density 3}. The temperature was {Temperature 3}, and the
location was at {Location 3}. Could you please provide some control and management suggestions?
Answer: {Non-chemical control solutions for Pest 3}
Question: I discovered {Pest} in my {Crop}, with a density of{Density}. The temperature was{Temperature}, and the location
was at {Location}. Could you please provide some control and management suggestions?
Answer:
3.3.3. Instruction-based Prompting
As mentioned in Section 2.2, constructing an effective prompt can involve any of the four elements: Instruction, Context, Input
Data and Output Indicator [28]. Giray [43] discussed the importance of understanding the prompt component and its role in
facilitating effective communication with the model. Through prompt design with these four elements, Giray [43] found one
can guide model behaviour and improve response quality, ensuring output is precise and meaningful. The template of the
instruction-based prompt is:
Instruction: Generate comprehensive and sustainable pest management suggestions based on the given crop, pest type and
density, and environmental conditions, including temperature and location.
Context: Pest management in agriculture requires balancing control measures with environmental sustainability. Different
crops and pests respond to varied strategies, and local environmental conditions significantly influence the effectiveness of
these strategies.
Input Data: For example:
For pest: {Pest}
The affected crops are: {Affected Crops}
The threshold is: {Threshold}
The non-chemical control solution could be: {Non-chemical control solutions}
Output Indicator: Question: I discovered {Pest} in my {Crop}, with a density of {Density}. The temperature was
{Temperature}, and the location was at {Location}. Could you please provide some control and management suggestions?
Please first determine whether management measures are needed, then output your own control solution in about 200 words.
The Instruction defines the pest management task for the model and guides the model to focus on the data in the input
question. The context explains why pest management in agriculture is essential, helping the model better understand the broader
implications of pest management and the necessity of tailoring suggestions to specific scenarios. The structured example

[PAGE 7]
systematically introduces the input data, incorporating placeholders for designated variables. Precisely, the {Pest} variable
corresponds to the pest identified in the inquiry, while the {Affected Crops} are derived from the ‘pest to affected crop.json’
file. Similarly, the {Threshold} values are extracted from the ‘thresholds database.xlsx’ file, and the {Non-chemical control
solutions} are obtained from the ‘pest to management.xlsx’ file. All input data variables are dynamically populated based on
the specific pest mentioned in the question.
3.3.4. Self-consistency Prompting
Self-consistency is an advanced prompting technique introduced by Wang et al. [44] building upon chain-of-thoughts (CoT).
This innovative approach involves generating diverse reasoning paths rather than relying on the most immediately probable path.
Self-consistency then deduces the most consistent answer by aggregating across these varied reasoning paths. Self-consistency
prompting summarised the responses from the zero-shot, few-shot, and instruction-based prompting and gave a final response.
The template of self-consistency prompting is:
Given these three responses:
Response 1: {Response 1 from zero-shot prompting}
Response 2: {Response 2 from few-shot prompting}
Response 3: {Response 3 from instruction-based prompting}
Create a summary response that combines the best elements of question: I discovered {Pest} in my {Crop}, with a density of
{Density}. The temperature was {Temperature}, and the location was at {Location}. Could you please provide some control
and management suggestions?
3.4. GPT-4 as Evaluator
Twelve combinations emerge when integrating FLAN, GPT-3.5, and GPT-4 models with four prompting methodologies. Each
combination is subjected to fifty input pest samples characterized by varying density and environmental conditions, generating
respective responses. These responses are then evaluated by GPT-4 (Model: ‘gpt-4-1106-preview’) regarding the accuracy and
the linguistic quality of the generated pest management suggestions. The prompt guiding the GPT to serve as an evaluator for
determining the necessity of action in responses and assessing the linguistic quality of these responses draws inspiration from
the article “G-EV AL: NLG Evaluation using GPT-4 with Better Human Alignment”, where the article introduces the G-EV AL
framework, designed for evaluating the quality of text generated by Natural Language Generation (NLG) systems [45].
For accuracy evaluation, the prompt begins with the ‘Evaluation Guide’, which instructs the GPT to assess and decide
whether action is required. The prompt followed with the ‘Evaluation Criteria’ to inform the GPT that this is a binary evaluation
to assign ‘1’ or ‘0’. Through the Evaluation Steps, the GPT is guided with the CoT sequence, asked to decide whether the
information presented within a response indicates that an action is required (‘1’) or not required (‘0’) in the following prompt
and the corresponding response. The template for accuracy evaluation is shown below:
Evaluation Guide:
You will be provided with a prompt and the corresponding response for pest management.
Your task is to evaluate the response based on the criteria below and decide whether action is required based on the response.
Please read and understand these instructions carefully. Refer back to this document as needed during your evaluation.
Evaluation Criteria:
Action Required (1 or 0) - This is a binary evaluation to determine if action is needed based on the response provided.
Evaluation Steps:
1. Carefully read the pest management suggestion in the response, identifying the main content, pay special attention to the first
sentence in the response, as it generally contains the decision of whether to take actions.
2. Analyze the response to see if it states whether action is required or not required to manage the pest.
3. Assign a score based on the evaluation criteria: 0 means no action is needed, 1 means the suggestion requires action.
4. If the response suggests the action is optional, needs further observation or continuous monitoring, leaves room for doubt,
lacks clearly direction, contains not be necessary or not immediate control, or if you cannot determine with complete certainty
that it indicates for management action, please mark it as 0.
Here are the prompt and response you need to evaluate:
Prompt: {Prompt}
Response: {Response}
Please state whether action is required (Answer 0 or 1 ONLY):
The linguistic quality evaluation contains six dimensions: Coherence, Logical Consistency, Fluency, Relevance, Comprehensiveness, and Exhaustiveness. The structure of the prompt for linguistic quality evaluation is similar to accuracy evaluation,

[PAGE 8]
comprising an Evaluation Guide with instructions, Evaluation Criteria that include scoring standards, and Evaluation Steps
based on a CoT approach. Except for some differences in details and descriptors, the principal distinction lies in the judgment
required from the GPT. For accuracy evaluation, the GPT is tasked with making a binary decision regarding the necessity of
action. In contrast, evaluating linguistic quality required the GPT to assign scores ranging from 1 to 10 for each of the six
dimensions.
4. RESULTS
Model & Prompting Coherence Consistency Fluency Relevance Comprehensibility Exhaustiveness
FLAN zero-shot 2.52 2.52 3.30 2.36 2.76 2.96
FLAN few-shot 2.68 3.00 3.42 2.44 3.32 3.46
FLAN instruction-based 3.70 3.92 4.84 5.06 5.04 4.36
FLAN self-consistency 2.64 3.22 4.04 1.94 3.92 3.18
GPT-3.5 zero-shot 8.82 8.24 9.90 8.74 9.54 7.54
GPT-3.5 few-shot 8.14 8.24 9.86 9.26 8.36 6.28
GPT-3.5 instruction-based 8.28 8.20 9.60 8.92 9.14 6.92
GPT-3.5 self-consistency 7.98 8.00 9.80 7.70 9.44 7.16
GPT-4 zero-shot 9.14 8.88 10.00 9.86 9.38 8.74
GPT-4 few-shot 8.32 8.46 9.98 9.46 8.92 7.14
GPT-4 instruction-based 8.62 8.76 9.64 9.46 9.32 7.68
GPT-4 self-consistency 8.72 8.90 10.00 9.30 9.88 8.14
Table 1: Linguistic quality of different models and prompting methods evaluated by GPT-4
Model & Prompting TP TN FP FN Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score Final Score
FLAN zero-shot 20 6 19 5 0.52 0.51 0.80 0.62 37.22
FLAN few-shot 10 10 15 15 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.40 34.32
FLAN instruction-based 14 14 11 11 0.56 0.56 0.56 0.56 49.32
FLAN self-consistency 24 1 24 1 0.50 0.50 0.96 0.66 38.94
GPT-3.5 zero-shot 25 4 21 0 0.58 0.54 1.00 0.70 75.98
GPT-3.5 few-shot 17 8 17 8 0.50 0.50 0.68 0.58 70.14
GPT-3.5 instruction-based 24 12 13 1 0.72 0.65 0.96 0.77 79.86
GPT-3.5 self-consistency 25 0 25 0 0.50 0.50 1.00 0.67 70.08
GPT-4 zero-shot 24 4 21 1 0.56 0.53 0.96 0.69 78.40
GPT-4 few-shot 21 7 18 4 0.56 0.54 0.84 0.66 74.68
GPT-4 instruction-based 24 9 16 1 0.66 0.60 0.96 0.74 79.88
GPT-4 self-consistency 25 0 25 0 0.50 0.50 1.00 0.67 74.94
Table 2: Performance metrics of different models and prompting methods with final scores
Tables 1 and 2 respectively present the linguistic quality of different models and prompting methods evaluated by GPT-4,
and the performance metrics of different models and prompting methods with the final scores for each model. The linguistic
quality evaluation involves scoring the responses based on the generated pest management suggestions across 50 samples, each
representing an average derived from these responses. In performance metrics, the TP (True Positives), TN (True Negatives), FP
(False Positives), and FN (False Negatives) are used as foundational elements for calculating Accuracy, Precision, and Recall.
To calculate the final scores for each “Model & Prompting” combination, we use a weighted average approach based on
pre-determined weights for various evaluation metrics. Specifically, the weights for Coherence, Logical Consistency, Fluency,
Relevance, Comprehensibility, and Exhaustiveness are each allocated10%, while Accuracy is assigned a higher weight of40%.
In the computation of the Final Score, the metrics of Coherence, Consistency, Fluency, Relevance, Comprehensibility, and
Exhaustiveness are evaluated on a scale from 1 to 10. In contrast, Accuracy is averaged, falling in a range from 0 to 1. To
harmonize these scores for a unified presentation in a percentage format, the scores for the linguistic quality are multiplied by
10, and the Accuracy score is multiplied by 100, facilitating a standardized evaluation outcome expressed on a 100-point scale.

[PAGE 9]
The mathematical formulation for the final score for each model can be expressed as follows:
F inal Score = 0.1 × (V alCoherence + V alConsistency + V alFluency + V alRelevance
+ V alComprehensibility + V alExhaustiveness) × 10
+ 0.4 × V alAccuracy × 100
(1)
Where V alCoherence, V alConsistency, V alFluency, V alRelevance, V alComprehensibility and V alExhaustiveness respectively represent the
numerical values scored by GPT-4 for the dimensions of Coherence, Consistency, Fluency, Relevance, Comprehensibility and
Exhaustiveness as listed in Table 1, and V alAccuracy denotes the average accuracy value in Table 2.
From Table 1, it can be observed that the performance of the different models and their application of different prompting
methods on the various dimensions of language quality. Specifically, the FLAN model scores low on each assessed dimension,
showing its understanding and generating language limitations. For example, FLAN zero-shot scored no more than 3.3 on cohesion, logical consistency, fluency, relevance, comprehensibility, and exhaustiveness, indicating that the FLAN model struggles
to handle complex language tasks effectively without specific training or guidance in generating pest management suggestions.
In contrast, the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models scored significantly higher than the FLAN model on all dimensions, especially
GPT-4, which achieved a perfect score of 10 on fluency and scored higher than 8 on the remaining dimensions. This result also
demonstrates the excellent ability of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 to generate high-quality, logically consistent, and relevant suggestions
in pest management. It is worth noting that the same model scores roughly the same on all dimensions of linguistic quality using
different prompting methods, suggesting that variations in prompting method have a limited impact on the language quality of
the model output. For example, the scores of the FLAN model under different prompting methods are different, but the overall
performance is still poor. In contrast, the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models maintain a high level of performance on all dimensions
regardless of the prompting method used.
Table 2 shows differences in performance metrics across models and prompting methods, focusing on accuracy, precision,
recall, and F1 scores. Evidently, the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models outperform the FLAN model across nearly all metrics, indicating their superior ability to generate pest management advice. Interestingly, while most models exhibit high recall rates, their
accuracy and precision remain low. This suggests that although the models can identify positive samples which require action
in pest scenarios, they did the wrong classification in scenarios scenarios that not require an action, leading to a high rate of
FP. Moreover, the performance impact of different prompting methods on the same model varies. For example, the accuracy
of the instruction-based method outperforms other prompting methods for the same model. This is attributed to including pest
threshold levels and affected crops in the instruction-based prompts, enabling LLMs to make better-informed judgments in pest
management based on the information provided in the prompts.
The instruction-based method with GPT-3.5 demonstrates the best performance in accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores.
Unexpectedly, it even surpasses GPT-4. Examination of model responses reveals that although GPT-4 may better understand
the content of prompts or appear “smarter”, it occasionally makes judgments such as “Although your current density is not at
the advised threshold level, preventive measures should be taken before populations reach damaging thresholds” (indicating
action despite not reaching the threshold) or “Although ... are not typical pests of ..., they may occasionally be found on various
crops” (classifying a non-affected pest as potentially affecting other crops, thereby suggesting that action is needed). This
leads to GPT-4 inaccurately classifies negative samples. Meanwhile, GPT-3.5 adheres strictly to the thresholds specified in the
prompts, more inclined to conclude that “... does not currently reach the treatment threshold, management measures may not
be immediately necessary” so that making more accurate judgments on negative samples.
The self-consistency prompting exhibits the poorest performance among all prompting methods. Despite its ability to
correctly identify almost all positive samples, it incorrectly classifies nearly all negative samples as positive, suggesting that
self-consistency prompts the model to judge nearly every scenario as requiring action. This outcome is due to the prompt
containing a directive to “Create a summary response that combines the best elements”, asking the model to summarize based
on responses from zero-shot, few-shot, and instruction-based prompting. Given the model’s inherent insensitivity to negative
samples, such summarization further deteriorates precision.
The instruction-based scores of GPT-4 are comparable to those of GPT-3.5, both around 79, indicating a clear advantage
in pest management scenarios when the model is provided with affected crops and threshold information in the prompt. In
contrast, FLAN model scores are generally lower, with its instruction-based score reaching 49.32 but still below those of
GPT series models, reflecting FLAN’s limitations in agricultural domain knowledge. The self-consistency prompting method
performs relatively better in GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models but still scores below instruction-based prompting due to its tendency
to classify nearly all negative scenarios as positive. Zero-shot and few-shot methods score lower across all models, likely due
to their lack of sufficient contextual information to guide the model in generating the most relevant and accurate advice.

[PAGE 10]
5. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this study evaluated the ability of different LLMs to generate suggestions for pest management in agriculture
using different prompting methods. By simulating various pest scenarios, we understood the strengths and limitations of using
different LLMs and prompting methods, bridging the gap between the lack of research on LLMs in agriculture. GPT-3.5
and GPT-4 showed accuracy and relevance in delivering pest management solutions, demonstrating the potential of GPT-4
as an agricultural support tool. However, LLMs tended to generate generic suggestions and showed less sensitivity in facing
negative samples. This highlights the need for continuous model updating and domain-specific fine-tuning. Instruction-based
prompting led to a significant increase in the accuracy of LLMs, confirming that the addition of relevant knowledge domains
has an indispensable role in generating responses to LLMs. In the future, we aim to enhance prompting methodologies to
enable LLMs to generate more precise evaluations by integrating domain-specific knowledge. Simultaneously, by refining the
prompts, we aspire for LLMs to deliver more detailed and user-friendly responses. Given that this technology primarily targets
farmers, it is advantageous if responses can provide differentiated pest control methods tailored to various pest stages, including
recommendations on varying dosages for management, intervals for prevention and control or subsequent monitoring.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Linyi Yang, Xiaoyuan Yi, Cunxiang Wang,
Yidong Wang, et al., “A survey on evaluation of large language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03109, 2023.
[2] Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder, “Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.06146, 2018.
[3] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[4] Yoshua Bengio, R ´ejean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent, “A neural probabilistic language model,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 13, 2000.
[5] Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts,
Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al., “Extracting training data from large language models,” in30th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), 2021, pp. 2633–2650.
[6] Bonan Min, Hayley Ross, Elior Sulem, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Thien Huu Nguyen, Oscar Sainz, Eneko Agirre, Ilana
Heintz, and Dan Roth, “Recent advances in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey,”
ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 1–40, 2023.
[7] Bonan Min, Hayley Ross, Elior Sulem, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Thien Huu Nguyen, Oscar Sainz, Eneko Agirre, Ilana
Heintz, and Dan Roth, “Recent advances in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey,”
ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 1–40, 2023.
[8] Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba, “Large
language models are human-level prompt engineers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910, 2022.
[9] Bonan Min, Hayley Ross, Elior Sulem, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Thien Huu Nguyen, Oscar Sainz, Eneko Agirre, Ilana
Heintz, and Dan Roth, “Recent advances in natural language processing via large pre-trained language models: A survey,”
ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 1–40, 2023.
[10] Zhuang Liu, Degen Huang, Kaiyu Huang, Zhuang Li, and Jun Zhao, “Finbert: A pre-trained financial language representation model for financial text mining,” in Proceedings of the twenty-ninth international conference on international joint
conferences on artificial intelligence, 2021, pp. 4513–4519.
[11] Dogu Araci, “Finbert: Financial sentiment analysis with pre-trained language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10063,
2019.
[12] Yi Yang, Mark Christopher Siy Uy, and Allen Huang, “Finbert: A pretrained language model for financial communications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08097, 2020.

[PAGE 11]
[13] Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10485, 2023.
[14] Tiffany H Kung, Morgan Cheatham, Arielle Medenilla, Czarina Sillos, Lorie De Leon, Camille Elepa˜no, Maria Madriaga,
Rimel Aggabao, Giezel Diaz-Candido, James Maningo, et al., “Performance of chatgpt on usmle: potential for ai-assisted
medical education using large language models,” PLoS digital health, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. e0000198, 2023.
[15] Arun James Thirunavukarasu, Darren Shu Jeng Ting, Kabilan Elangovan, Laura Gutierrez, Ting Fang Tan, and Daniel
Shu Wei Ting, “Large language models in medicine,” Nature medicine, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1930–1940, 2023.
[16] Som Biswas, “Importance of chat gpt in agriculture: According to chat gpt,” Available at SSRN 4405391, 2023.
[17] Bruno Silva, Leonardo Nunes, Roberto Estev ˜ao, and Ranveer Chandra, “Gpt-4 as an agronomist assistant? answering
agriculture exams using large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06225, 2023.
[18] Jiajun Qing, Xiaoling Deng, Yubin Lan, and Zhikai Li, “Gpt-aided diagnosis on agricultural image based on a new light
yolopc,” Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 213, pp. 108168, 2023.
[19] Tanay Varshney and Annie Surla, “An introduction to large language models: Prompt engineering and p-tuning,”
https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/an-introduction-to-large-language-models-prompt-engineering-and-p-tuning,
Accessed: 2023-11-21.
[20] Isabelle Nguyen, “The beginner’s guide to llm prompting,” https://haystack.deepset.ai/blog/
beginners-guide-to-llm-prompting ,
Accessed: 2023-11-21.
[21] Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig, “Pre-train, prompt, and
predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language processing,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 55,
no. 9, pp. 1–35, 2023.
[22] Bertalan Mesk ´o, “Prompt engineering as an important emerging skill for medical professionals: tutorial,” Journal of
Medical Internet Research, vol. 25, pp. e50638, 2023.
[23] Jiaqi Wang, Enze Shi, Sigang Yu, Zihao Wu, Chong Ma, Haixing Dai, Qiushi Yang, Yanqing Kang, Jinru Wu, Huawen
Hu, et al., “Prompt engineering for healthcare: Methodologies and applications,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14670, 2023.
[24] Thomas F Heston and Charya Khun, “Prompt engineering in medical education,” International Medical Education, vol.
2, no. 3, pp. 198–205, 2023.
[25] Jonas Oppenlaender, “Prompt engineering for text-based generative art,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13988, 2022.
[26] Dietrich Trautmann, Alina Petrova, and Frank Schilder, “Legal prompt engineering for multilingual legal judgement
prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02199, 2022.
[27] Maciej P Polak and Dane Morgan, “Extracting accurate materials data from research papers with conversational language
models and prompt engineering–example of chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05352, 2023.
[28] “Elements of a prompt,” https://www.promptingguide.ai/introduction/elements,
Accessed: 2023-11-22.
[29] “ChatGPT Prompt Engineering for Developers course,” https://learn.deeplearning.ai/
chatgpt-prompt-eng/,
Accessed: 2023-11-22.
[30] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[31] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al., “Improving language understanding by generative pre-training,” OpenAI, 2018.

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: [13] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language
Row 1: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10485, 2023.
Row 2: [13]: [14] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Tiffany H Kung, Morgan Cheatham, Arielle Medenilla, Czarina Sillos, Lorie De Leon, Camille Elepaño, Maria Madriaga,
Row 3: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Rimel Aggabao, Giezel Diaz-Candido, James Maningo, et al., “Performance of chatgpt on usmle: potential for ai-assisted
Row 4: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: medical education using large language models,” PLoS digital health, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. e0000198, 2023.
Row 5: [13]: [15] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Arun James Thirunavukarasu, Darren Shu Jeng Ting, Kabilan Elangovan, Laura Gutierrez, Ting Fang Tan, and Daniel
Row 6: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Shu Wei Ting, “Large language models in medicine,” Nature medicine, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1930–1940, 2023.
Row 7: [13]: [16] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Som Biswas, “Importance of chat gpt in agriculture: According to chat gpt,” Available at SSRN 4405391, 2023.
Row 8: [13]: [17] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Bruno Silva, Leonardo Nunes, Roberto Estevão, and Ranveer Chandra, “Gpt-4 as an agronomist assistant? answering
Row 9: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: agriculture exams using large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06225, 2023.
Row 10: [13]: [18] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Jiajun Qing, Xiaoling Deng, Yubin Lan, and Zhikai Li, “Gpt-aided diagnosis on agricultural image based on a new light
Row 11: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: yolopc,” Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 213, pp. 108168, 2023.
Row 12: [13]: [19] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Tanay Varshney and Annie Surla, “An introduction to large language models: Prompt engineering and p-tuning,”
Row 13: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/an-introduction-to-large-language-models-prompt-engineering-and-p-tuning,
Row 14: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Accessed: 2023-11-21.
Row 15: [13]: [20] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Isabelle Nguyen, “The beginner’s guide to llm prompting,” https://haystack.deepset.ai/blog/
Row 16: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: beginners-guide-to-llm-prompting,
Row 17: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Accessed: 2023-11-21.
Row 18: [13]: [21] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig, “Pre-train, prompt, and
Row 19: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language processing,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 55,
Row 20: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: no. 9, pp. 1–35, 2023.
Row 21: [13]: [22] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Bertalan Meskó, “Prompt engineering as an important emerging skill for medical professionals: tutorial,” Journal of
Row 22: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Medical Internet Research, vol. 25, pp. e50638, 2023.
Row 23: [13]: [23] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Jiaqi Wang, Enze Shi, Sigang Yu, Zihao Wu, Chong Ma, Haixing Dai, Qiushi Yang, Yanqing Kang, Jinru Wu, Huawen
Row 24: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Hu, et al., “Prompt engineering for healthcare: Methodologies and applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14670, 2023.
Row 25: [13]: [24] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Thomas F Heston and Charya Khun, “Prompt engineering in medical education,” International Medical Education, vol.
Row 26: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: 2, no. 3, pp. 198–205, 2023.
Row 27: [13]: [25] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Jonas Oppenlaender, “Prompt engineering for text-based generative art,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13988, 2022.
Row 28: [13]: [26] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Dietrich Trautmann, Alina Petrova, and Frank Schilder, “Legal prompt engineering for multilingual legal judgement
Row 29: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02199, 2022.
Row 30: [13]: [27] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Maciej P Polak and Dane Morgan, “Extracting accurate materials data from research papers with conversational language
Row 31: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: models and prompt engineering–example of chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05352, 2023.
Row 32: [13]: [28] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: “Elements of a prompt,” https://www.promptingguide.ai/introduction/elements,
Row 33: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Accessed: 2023-11-22.
Row 34: [13]: [29] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: “ChatGPT Prompt Engineering for Developers course,” https://learn.deeplearning.ai/
Row 35: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: chatgpt-prompt-eng/,
Row 36: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Accessed: 2023-11-22.
Row 37: [13]: [30] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Row 38: [13]: | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
Row 39: [13]: [31] | Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, and Daochen Zha, “Fingpt: Democratizing internet-scale data for financial large language: Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al., “Improving language understanding by genera-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 12]
[32] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al., “Language models are
unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI blog, vol. 1, no. 8, pp. 9, 2019.
[33] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al., “Improving language understanding by generative pre-training,” OpenAI, 2018.
[34] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[35] “OpenAI Models,” https://platform.openai.com/docs/models,
Accessed: 2024-02-23.
[36] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and
Peter J Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 5485–5551, 2020.
[37] Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa
Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al., “Scaling instruction-finetuned language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416,
2022.
[38] S. Ellis, S. White, J. Holland, Barbara Smith, R. Collier, and A. Jukes, Encyclopaedia of pests and natural enemies in field crops , Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board (AHDB), United Kingdom, Nov. 2014,
The full text is available from: https://projectblue.blob.core.windows.net/media/Default/
Imported%20Publication%20Docs/AHDB%20Cereals%20&%20Oilseeds/Pests/Encyclopaedia%
20of%20pests%20and%20natural%20enemies%20in%20field%20crops.pdf.
[39] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M Dai, and
Quoc V Le, “Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
[40] Yongqin Xian, Christoph H Lampert, Bernt Schiele, and Zeynep Akata, “Zero-shot learning—a comprehensive evaluation
of the good, the bad and the ugly,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 41, no. 9, pp.
2251–2265, 2018.
[41] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[42] Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer, “Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12837, 2022.
[43] Louie Giray, “Prompt engineering with chatgpt: A guide for academic writers,” Annals of Biomedical Engineering, pp.
1–5, 2023.
[44] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou,
“Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
[45] Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu, “Gpteval: Nlg evaluation using
gpt-4 with better human alignment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634, 2023.