[PAGE 1]
CBR-RAG: Case-Based Reasoning for Retrieval
Augmented Generation in LLMs for Legal
Question Answering ⋆
Nirmalie Wiratunga1, Ramitha Abeyratne 1, Lasal Jayawardena1,2, Kyle
Martin1, Stewart Massie 1, Ikechukwu Nkisi-Orji1, Ruvan Weerasinghe2, Anne
Liret3, and Bruno Fleisch 3
1 Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen, UK
{n.wiratunga, r.abeyratne, l.jayawardena, k.martin3, s.massie,
i.nkisi-orji}@rgu.ac.uk,
2 Informatics Institute of Technology, Sri Lanka
ruvan.w@iit.lk
3 BT France
{anne.liret, bruno.fleisch }@bt.fr
Abstract. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) enhances Large Language Model (LLM) output by providing prior knowledge as context to
input. This is beneficial for knowledge-intensive and expert reliant tasks,
including legal question-answering, which require evidence to validate
generated text outputs. We highlight that Case-Based Reasoning (CBR)
presents key opportunities to structure retrieval as part of the RAG
process in an LLM. We introduce CBR-RAG, where CBR cycle’s initial
retrieval stage, its indexing vocabulary, and similarity knowledge containers are used to enhance LLM queries with contextually relevant cases.
This integration augments the original LLM query, providing a richer
prompt. We present an evaluation of CBR-RAG, and examine different
representations (i.e. general and domain-specific embeddings) and methods of comparison (i.e. inter, intra and hybrid similarity) on the task of
legal question-answering. Our results indicate that the context provided
by CBR’s case reuse enforces similarity between relevant components of
the questions and the evidence base leading to significant improvements
in the quality of generated answers.
Keywords: CBR, RAG, LLMs, Text Embedding, Indexing, Retrieval
1 Introduction
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) enhances the performance of large language models (LLMs) on knowledge-intensive NLP tasks by combining the strengths
of pre-trained parametric (language models with learned parameters) and nonparametric (external knowledge resources e.g., Wikipedia) memories [15]. This
⋆ This research is funded by SFC International Science Partnerships Fund.
arXiv:2404.04302v1 [cs.CL] 4 Apr 2024

[PAGE 2]
2 N. Wiratunga et al.
hybrid approach not only sets new benchmarks in open-domain question answering by generating more accurate, specific, and factually correct responses
but also addresses critical challenges in the field such as the difficulty in updating stored knowledge and providing provenance for generated outputs. For
example, in the context of legal question-answering, RAG-based systems can
retrieve publicly available legislation documents from open knowledge bases to
provide context for user queries. However, such a system would require output
that could be validated, and moderation of content generated by LLMs has been
highlighted as a critical concern [11].
Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) presents an excellent opportunity here, as previous solutions form the basis of a knowledge-base which can be evidenced in
best practice or regulations [17]. CBR can enhance the retrieval process in RAG
models by organising the non-parametric memory in a way that cases (knowledge entries or past experiences) are more effectively matched to queries. Previous work on ensemble CBR-neural systems has also highlighted the benefits of
CBR integration, demonstrating improvements in factual correctness over purely
neural methods [22]. Accordingly, in this work we present three contributions.
– Firstly, we formalise the role of the CBR methodology to form context for
RAG systems.
– Secondly, we provide an empirical comparison of different retrieval methods for RAG, examining different representations (i.e. general and domainspecific embeddings) and methods of comparison (i.e. inter, intra and hybrid
similarity).
– Finally, we present these contributions in the context of the legal domain, and
provide results for a generative legal question-answering (QA) application 1.
Our results highlight the opportunities of CBR-RAG systems for knowledgereliant generative tasks.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe influential work
targeting the legal domain from CBR and LLM literature. In Section 3, we
formalise CBR-RAG and its application to legal QA, while in Section 4 we
detail the different methods for creating and comparing embeddings to perform
case retrieval. In Section 5 we describe the different encoders used to create
embeddings. Finally, in Section 6 we discuss the methodology and results of our
evaluation, followed by conclusions in Section 7.
2 Related Work
CBR boasts a long-standing history in the legal domain, with initial efforts concentrating on extracting features to index law cases effectively. These features,
referred to as ‘factors’, are pivotal in systems like HYPO [3], which employ
fact-oriented representations applied to trade secret law and extended to legal tutoring with the CATO [1] system. More generally with Textual CBR, a
1 Reproducible code is available: https://github.com/rgu-iit-bt/cbr-for-legal-rag

[PAGE 3]
CBR for RAG in LLMs for Legal QA 3
key focus has been on extracting features for case comparison, using methods
that range from decision trees, as exemplified by the SMILE system in creating
indexing vocabularies for legal case retrieval [5], to association rules for case representation [24]. Much of this has now been advanced by the adoption of neural
transformations of input text through transformer-style embeddings with LLMs.
The application of LLMs presents an interesting approach in addressing challenges within the legal domain. LLMs use language understanding capabilities
to interact with users, enabling extraction of key elements from legal documents,
and present information in an understandable manner to enhance decisionmaking processes. For this reason, GPT-based [14,18] and BERT-based [7] transformer models are popular for LegalAI. However their black-box nature and tendency to hallucinate and lack of factual faithfulness present significant challenges
for deployment [13]. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems address
this by presenting the LLM with factual data to generate responses [15,16], employing a variety of sophisticated fact identifying mechanisms [2,19]. However
currently such retrieval methods in RAG do not make use of CBR’s potential
for varying matching strategies across different segments of the content being
matched. Here we are reminded of research in CBR involving the integration
with IR systems, specifically where CBR has been effectively used to retrieve
‘most on-point’ cases to guide the search and browse of vast IR collections [17].
Our work draws inspiration from these integrative approaches, applying the principles of CBR to improve contextual understanding within LLMs.
LLMs are typically pre-trained on general text and subsequently fine-tuned
on legal texts to learn domain-specific representations. Obtaining sufficiently
large data sets for LLM training poses a significant challenge. For example, pretrained LLMs may be fine-tuned using the LEDGAR dataset [20] for legal text
classification downstream tasks or on extensive corpora like the Harvard Law
case corpus1 using masked-language modelling or next-sentence prediction techniques. Thereafter tested on other legal downstream tasks, such as those found in
the CaseHOLD dataset [8], which include tasks related to Overruling, Terms of
Service, and CaseHOLD itself. We observe that there remains a notable scarcity
of LLMs specifically applied to legal question answering tasks. This is likely because existing legal QA datasets are mostly small, manually curated datasets
(for example, the rule-qa task in the LegalBench collection [10] is formed from
50 question-answer pairs). However the recent release of the Open Australian
Legal Question-Answering (ALQA) dataset 2, comprising over 2,100 questionanswer-snippet triplets (synthesised by GPT-4 from the Open Australian Legal
Corpus), presents an opportunity for LLMs to expand to legal QA.
3 CBR-RAG: Using CBR to form context for LLMs
In CBR-RAG, we integrate the initial retrieve-only stage of the CBR cycle with
its indexing vocabulary and similarity knowledge containers to enable the re1 https://case.law/
2 https://huggingface.co/datasets/umarbutler/open-australian-legal-qa

[PAGE 4]
4 N. Wiratunga et al.
trieval of cases that serve as context for querying an LLM. Consequently, the
original LLM query is augmented with content retrieved via CBR, creating a
contextually enriched prompt for the LLM.
Figures 1 illustrates a high-level architecture of a generative model for QuestionAnswering systems, highlighting the integration of CBR within it. Here we denote the generative LLM model as, G, and the prompt, P , used to generate the
response as a tuple, p = ( Q, C), where Q is the question reflecting the user’s
query, and, C, is the context text with relevant details to guide the response
generation. The response generated by the model for the query, Q, is denoted
as the answer, A.
Fig. 1: CBR-RAG
3.1 Casebase
We used the Australian Open Legal QA (ALQA) [6] dataset to create the casebase. The dataset is formed of 2,124 LLM-generated question-answer pairs from
the Australian Open Legal Corpus dataset. Each QA pair is corroborated by a
supporting textual snippet from a legal document within the corpus for factual
validation. An example case about the ‘interpretation of reasonable grounds in
searches without a warrant’ appears in Table 1. Here the support text provides
the context in which the question should be answered. The bold text further
highlights examples of named entities that might usefully be captured separately
for case comparison purposes.
Figure 2 provides a frequency distributions of the legal acts identified in the
casebase with the most frequently referenced legal acts in the dataset listed in

[PAGE 5]
CBR for RAG in LLMs for Legal QA 5
Table 1: Examples Legal Q&A case
Component Description
Case Name Smith v The State of New South Wales (2015)
Question How did the case of Smith v The State of New South Wales
(2015) clarify the interpretation of ‘reasonable grounds’ for
conducting a search without a warrant?
Support In [Case Name: Smith v The State of NSW (2015)] ,
the plaintiff [Action: was searched without a warrant]
[Location: near a known drug trafficking area] based
on the plaintiff’s nervous demeanor and presence in the
area, but [Outcome: no drugs were found] . The legality
of the search was contested, focusing on [Legal Concept:
whether ‘reasonable grounds’ existed] .
Answer The case ruled ‘reasonable grounds’ require clear, specific
facts of criminal activity, not just location or behavior.
Index Act (Freq)
1 Federal Court Rules (9)
2 Civil Aviation Regulations 1998 (8)
3 Land & Env. Court Act 1979 (8)
4 Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (7)
5 Migration Act 1958 (Cth) (6)
6 Customs Act 1901, Tariff Act 1995
(6)
7 Industrial Relations Act 1996 (6)
8 Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979 (5)
9 Trees (Disputes Between Neighbours) Act 2006 (5)
10 Migration Act 1958 (5)
Fig. 2: Ten most frequent legal acts in the casebase are listed on the left, and the
legal act frequency distribution appears on the right.
the table (extracted using the prompt in Table 3). The most frequently mentioned act is the ‘Federal Court Rules’ out of 785 unique legal acts. Within the
dataset, 1,183 (57%) cases were found to have no reference to legal acts, while
only 44 acts appeared in more than 1 case. Accordingly, relying solely on legal
acts for indexing would not be suitable for this casebase. Instead, it presents an
ideal opportunity for experimentation with neural embeddings. These embeddings form the indexing vocabulary, with weighted similarity contributing to the
similarity knowledge.

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: Index | Act (Freq)
Row 1: Index: 1.0 | Act (Freq): Federal Court Rules (9)
Row 2: Index: 2.0 | Act (Freq): Civil Aviation Regulations 1998 (8)
Row 3: Index: 3.0 | Act (Freq): Land & Env. Court Act 1979 (8)
Row 4: Index: 4.0 | Act (Freq): Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (7)
Row 5: Index: 5.0 | Act (Freq): Migration Act 1958 (Cth) (6)
Row 6: Index: 6.0 | Act (Freq): Customs Act 1901, Tariff Act 1995
Row 7: Index: | Act (Freq): (6)
Row 8: Index: 7.0 | Act (Freq): Industrial Relations Act 1996 (6)
Row 9: Index: 8.0 | Act (Freq): Environmental Planning and AsRow 10: Index: | Act (Freq): sessment Act 1979 (5)
Row 11: Index: 9.0 | Act (Freq): Trees (Disputes Between NeighRow 12: Index: | Act (Freq): bours) Act 2006 (5)
Row 13: Index: 10.0 | Act (Freq): Migration Act 1958 (5)
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
6 N. Wiratunga et al.
4 Representation and Similarity
We formalise our retrieval and representation methods. Let’s denote the casebase
as a collection of cases C = {c1, c2, . . . , cn} containing question and answer legal
cases. Each case c, in the context of RAG is formalised as a tuple,
c = < Q, S, E, A >
where Q represents a question, A represents the answer, S represents the
support for a given answer from an evidence base, and E represents a set of
entities extracted from S. This case representation underpins RAG in its use of
S. Typical CBR for question answering would be composed mainly of problemsolution components (i.e. question and answer respectively together with any
lessons learnt), structuring cases as problem-solution-support enhances answer
generation for the LLM by providing factually accurate context. Furthermore,
while only the most relevant component of a document is extracted as the support text, the link to the full document is available in the original ALQA corpus.
4.1 Representation
Initially, in textual form, each part is represented by neural embeddings. For diverse retrieval scenarios, we use a dual embedding form forQ to enable matching
it with not only other questions but where necessary matching it to the supporting text or the entities as follows:
– Intra Embeddings , f(·), optimised for attribute matching. These embeddings facilitate attribute-to-attribute comparisons where local similarities
can be computed between the same types of attributes (e.g., questions with
questions).
– Inter Embeddings , g(·), designed for information retrieval (IR) scenarios.
These embeddings allow for matching that is not restricted to like attributes,
enabling inter-attribute similarity assessment. This approach is particularly
useful in situations where a question may be relevant for comparison to the
support text or the entities.
A representation using intra-embedding is useful for tasks like semantic textual similarity that focus on finding sentences with closely related meanings,
even if phrased differently. For example, a sentence like ‘The judge dismissed
the case due to lack of evidence.’ would find a semantically similar counterpart
in ‘The court threw out the lawsuit because there was insufficient proof’ Conversely, an inter-embedding representation is suited for tasks aimed at searching
for documents relevant to a query. For example, a legal query on ‘copyright
infringement in digital media’ may yield cases with outcomes such as rulings
on unauthorised content distribution or streaming without permission. These
highlight the distinction between representations needed for ascertaining semantic similarity with intra-embeddings ( f(.)), and finding relevant content with
inter-embeddings (g(.)).

[PAGE 7]
CBR for RAG in LLMs for Legal QA 7
The dual-embedding case representation, accommodating both forms of retrieval tasks, is given by:
c = < f (Q), g(Q), g(S), g(E), A >
Similarly, the prompt can be expressed using the inter embedding as follows 1:
p = < f (Q), g(Q), C >
4.2 Case Retrieval
We use case retrieval to augment the context part of a prompt,p, given its query,
Q. Accordingly, there are three comparison strategies for case retrieval: intra-,
inter-, and hybrid-embedding based retrieval.
Intra-embedding retrieval involves matching on the basis of embeddings obtained from function f(.). Here f(Q) which represents the embeddings from the
prompt’s query is matched to query parts of the cases in the casebase. The best
matching case identified from intra-embedding retrieval is defined by:
βk = top-k
ci∈C, k
Sim(f(Q), f(Qi)) (1)
Here, top-k refers to the selection of indices corresponding to the k highestscoring cases as determined by the similarity measure. β represents the indices
of these retrieved cases, while Sim is a similarity metric (e.g., cosine similarity)
that measures the similarity between the intra-embedding of the prompt’s question and the intra-embeddings of the question parts of each case in the casebase.
Inter-embedding retrieval uses g(Q) from the prompt to search the casebase, focusing on identifying relevant cases akin to an information retrieval style
search, where attribute-to-attribute matching is not strictly followed. The best
matching case is identified as follows:
βk = top-k
ci∈C, k
Sim(g(Q), g(Xi)) (2)
where Xi can be either Si (the Snippet part) or Ei (the Entity part) of the case.
Hybrid embedding retrieval is an alternative matching that involves a combination of both intra and inter-embeddings of the prompt’s Q representations
being used to match cases in a hybrid weighted retrieval approach:
βk = top-k
ci∈C, k
(w1 · Sim(f(Q), f(Qi)) + w2 · Sim(g(Q), g(Si))+
w3 · Sim(g(Q), g(Ei)))
(3)
1 Note: In our notation, we employ a calligraphic font for the prompt components
(f(Q), g(Q), C) to distinguish them from those of cases. Despite this stylistic difference, it is important to understand that both prompts and cases utilise similar
embedding representations.

[PAGE 8]
8 N. Wiratunga et al.
This approach utilises both representation forms of the prompt’s queryf(Q) and
g(Q) for retrieval. Given the top k cases {cβj }k
j=1, we can extract the context
for the prompt based on the retrieval option ρ as follows:
Context, C(ρ) =
(
{Sβj }k
j=1 if ρ = 1, “support-text-only” (4a)
{Qβj , Sβj , Eβj , Aβj }k
j=1 if ρ = 2, “full-case” (4b)
5 Embedding models
In this work, we explore embeddings generated by BERT, AnglEBERT, and
LegalBERT; the latter being pre-trained on diverse English legal documents,
with the rest all being general-purpose embeddings. We next provide an overview
of these models, as illustrated in Figure 3, and discuss how they can be used to
generate the f and g forms of representations.
Fig. 3: Architecture and training process for BERT and AnglEBERT. Note that
LegalBERT has the same architecture as BERT, but is pre-trained on legal text.
5.1 BER T
The Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model [9]
is a language model for learning generalisable text embeddings. The model is
formed of an encoder block (taken from the transformer architecture in [23]),
followed by a fully-connected layer. The bidirectional nature of BERT is derived
from its pre-training technique, which conditions on both the left and right
contexts of input sentences simultaneously. The model uses a self-supervised
learning strategy that combines masked-language modeling (MLM) with next
sentence prediction (NSP) to acquire contextually rich word embeddings. During
training, a pair of sentences is fed into the model, and a random subset of words
is replaced with the [MASK] token, establishing a sequence-to-point task. The

[PAGE 9]
CBR for RAG in LLMs for Legal QA 9
objective here is to predict the masked words by using the context provided by
both previous and subsequent words. Furthermore, a [CLS] token is inserted at
the beginning of the input sequence to accumulate contextual information from
the entire sequence, facilitating tasks like sentence relationship classification.
Pre-training with both MLM and NSP, can be seen as typical text prediction
and is controlled by the standard cross-entropy objective function. BERT is pretrained on a combination of large general purpose text datasets totalling 3.3B
words and has demonstrated strong performance across many domains.
5.2 LegalBER T T rained on General Legal Data
Domain-specific knowledge is known to be beneficial for legal tasks [7,21]. For
example, the word ‘case’ may refer to a variety of containers (brief case, suit
case, display case, etc), but also a court case. While semantic relations with the
latter are likely to be impactful for legal question answering, the greater frequency of the former in general corpora will result in embeddings more weighted
towards that context. The LegalBERT family of models [7] enhance the BERT
model by further pre-training on an additional 12 GB of diverse English legal
documents from a mix of UK, EU, and US legislation and case law. The goal
is to embed domain knowledge into produced embeddings by learning from a
relevant document set.
5.3 BER T with AnglE Embeddings
The AnglE embeddings [16] adopts a contrastive learning strategy (similar to
Siamese networks [4]) to learn embeddings through matching both positive and
negative text pairs, where a positive pair is considered to be similar (above
some threshold usually). The process begins with BERT embeddings, input to
AnglE for optimisation. Its novelty stems from one of the three loss functions,
that are designed to overcome the vanishing gradient issue encountered in cosine
similarity-based comparisons, particularly at the extremes of similarity (or dissimilarity). This is achieved by comparing embeddings based on angle and magnitude within complex spaces, effectively bypassing cosine similarity’s saturation
problem. Once trained the AnglE embedding model can be used to generate text
embeddings using a final pooling layer [16].
One of the difficulties when using AnglEBERT for a specific domain is that
one must generate a supervised training set (unlike with BERT which can be
trained in an unsupervised manner using the MLM and NSP self-supervision
methods). This is because the AnglE method adopts a contrastive learning strategy, where the supervised dataset must include paired instances for training. This
can be prohibitive in contexts where domain expertise is required for labelling.
5.4 Dual-embedding Case Representation with AnglE
For the purposes of this work, we leverage dual-embeddings introduced in [16]. In
terms of the inter-embedding retrieval, a specific embedding prompt cue Cue(Q)

[PAGE 10]
10 N. Wiratunga et al.
is used to contextualise the relevance of the query embeddings towards matching
with attributes other than that of questions, as follows:
Cue(Q) = “Represent this sentence for searching relevant passages: ” {Q}
The idea here is that the cue is used to influence the embedding generation
towards inter-retrieval oriented embeddings as follows:
g(Cue(Q))
For intra-embedding retrieval the prompt text is empty, i.e. input the text without specifying an additional prompt cue. This means the embedding function f
processes the query Q directly, as f(Q). Table 2 provides an example of question
and support text version that are used as input to each of BERT, AnglEBERT
and LegalBERT with relevant prompts to enable the generation of the alternative embeddings that we intend using during case matching with CBR.
Table 2: Comparison of an example question with and without the Cue text (in
blue) to create inter and intra embeddings.
Embedding Question
intra f(“What were the court’s findings regarding the financial liabilities
of Allco Finance Group Ltd to Blairgowrie Trading Ltd?”)
inter
g(“Represent this sentence for searching relevant passages:” + “What
were the court’s findings regarding the financial liabilities of Allco
Finance Group Ltd to Blairgowrie Trading Ltd?” )
6 Evaluation
The aim of our evaluation is two-fold: 1) to understand the impact of inter and
intra embeddings on weighted retrieval, and 2) to understand the generative
quality of RAG systems when coupled with a case-based retrieval-only system.
To analyse weighted retrieval we compared several representation combinations
of embedding models and similarity weights as follows:
– compare three alternative forms of text embeddings using the encoders presented in Section 5 - BERT, LegalBERT and AnglEBERT;
– compare four alternative weighting schemes to assess utility of question,
support, and entity components within case representations. These include:
• Question only, represented by the weights [1,0,0] (see Equation 1),
• Support only, with weights [0,1,0],
• Entities only, using weights [0,0,1] (see Equation 2),
• A hybrid approach, combining these components with weights [0.25, 0.40,
0.35] (refer to Equation 3).

[PAGE 11]
CBR for RAG in LLMs for Legal QA 11
Accordingly BERT[0,1,0] would denote using a Support only version of retrieval
with the BERT embedding; and using the same naming convention, AnglEBERT[0.25,0.4,0.35] indicates a hybrid dual embedding method where AnglEBERT embeddings are used with the specified weights for case retrieval. Our
baseline comparator is an LLM with no case retrieval i.e. No-RAG.
We selected Mistral [12] for answer generation at test time, due to its opensource availability, allowing us to use a model distinct from OpenAI’s GPT-4,
which was employed for formulating the Q&A casebase. This approach effectively
simulates consulting an alternative expert in place of a human specialist.
6.1 Legal QA Dataset Analysis
The ALQA dataset, introduced in Section 3 is a synthetic Q&A dataset generated from real legal documents in the Australian Open Legal Corpus. Here
sentences extracted from documents, each coupled with a prompt, are used to
generate corresponding questions and answers from OpenAI’s GPT-4 model. We
performed a multi-stage analysis to ensure that this dataset was appropriate for
our retrieval and follow-on answer generation tasks.
Fig. 4: Cosine similarity distribution for intra- and inter-embeddings.
Dataset V alidation involved a randomly sampled manual analysis of the
questions and answers performed by the research team to ensure the dataset
contained no LLM-based anomalies (i.e. hallucination, factually incorrect statements, etc). We then converted the question text into intra- and inter-embeddings
using BERT, LegalBERT and AnglEBERT and examined the similarity distribution by calculating the cosine similarity between each instance and its nearest
neighbour (shown in Figure 4). We observe that the similarity distributions are
mostly Gaussian, with the most frequent values between 0.7 and 0.8 cosine similarity for both embedding types produced by BERT and AnglEBERT. Embeddings learned by LegalBERT seem to be more densely clustered, as indicated
by the higher similarity. This could suggest a reduced ability to discriminate
based on similarity compared to BERT and AnglEBERT. We believe the results
of this analysis were very promising, as they suggest the embeddings avoid the

[PAGE 12]
12 N. Wiratunga et al.
traditional issues associated with feature engineering approaches (such as sparse
similarity distributions).
Case-Base consisted of the ALQA dataset where each case consists of the
full Q&A content as discussed in Section 3.1. While originally containing 2,124
question-support-answer triplets, 40 were removed due to offensive content, and
therefore our case-base contains 2,084 cases. The case representation was also
expanded to include entities to form the complete tuple as discussed in Section 4.
Table 3: Prompts used in this research.
Scenarios & Generator Prompt
Extract legal acts to pair
cases for test set creation.
Gpt-3.5-turbo-0125
Extract the legal act(s) in this text. Print ‘None’ if nothing is found. { TEXT }
Extract entities for case representation.
Gpt-3.5-turbo-0125
Extract named entities and unique identifiers as a single text (separated with white-space) line from this ” +
TEXT. Print ‘’ if nothing is found. { TEXT }
Generate Qs from text pairs
for test set creation.
Mistral-7B
Produce a question and answer where the answer requires
detailed access to both Text 1 and Text 2. Don’t refer texts in the question or answer. { Text1: TEXT1 —
Text2: TEXT }
Generate answers from snippets for retrieval analysis.
Mistral-7B
Answer QUESTION by using the following contexts: {
TEXT1 — TEXT2 }
Generating answers from
cases for retrieval analysis.
Mistral-7B
Answer QUESTION as a simple string (with no structure) by using the following question, citation, and answer
tuples as context: { Question: Q1, Citation: C1, Answer:
A1 — Question: Q2, Citation: C2, Answer: A2 }
T est Set Creation focused on creating a discrete test set of questions that
reference applicable knowledge in the case-base, without directly mapping to a
single case in the case-base. To guide the generation of unique questions for test
purposes, we first analysed the case-base in terms of unique legal acts mentioned
in all cases. We then selected case pairs based on the common acts and, using
Mistral-7B [12] generated 35 new question-answer pairs, each answerable using
the combined information from both cases in a pair, as detailed in the prompt
presented in Table 3. The rationale is that by pairing cases with common legal
acts, we can encourage Mistral to create novel test Q&A pairs. These pairs are
unique in that they necessitate synthesising information from both cases in the
pair to form a coherent question and corresponding answer, ensuring that the
resulting pairs differ from the questions and answers of the individual cases in the
case-base, thereby creating a set of new test cases that are reasonably disjoint.

[PAGE 13]
CBR for RAG in LLMs for Legal QA 13
All outputs were manually reviewed to ensure they were suitable test cases 1.
After pruning cases that lacked suitable answers or contained answers merely
linked to the case pair by conjunctions, we were left with a total of 32 cases.
6.2 Retrieval Analysis
We first evaluated the quality of case retrieval, by exploiting the fact that each
of our 32 test cases had originated from a pair of parent cases. Accordingly, for
each test case, we treated the pair of parent cases from the training set as relevant, and all other cases as irrelevant (allowing calculation of ranked precision
and recall). We then performed a similarity-based retrieval using the k-Nearest
Neighbors algorithm, exploring a range of k values consisting of prime numbers
between 1 and 37 We calculated results using F1-score for retrieval@k and visualised using a heat-map (see Figure 5). Here the best performing algorithm
was Hybrid AnglEBERT with [0.25, 0.40, 0.35] weights and k = 3. Accordingly,
k was selected as 3 to be used in the subsequent generative experiments with
k = 1 as a comparative baseline.
Fig. 5: F1 score for Retrieval@k
6.3 Generation Results
We evaluated the quality of generated output using six algorithms run with
k = 1 and k = 3, along with the baseline for No-RAG. The results are presented
in Table 4.
Next, we evaluated the quality of generated output. Six algorithms were run
with k = 1 and k = 3, along with the baseline for No-RAG.
1 Test dataset available at open-australian-legal-qa-test

[PAGE 14]
14 N. Wiratunga et al.
Table 4: Cosine scores for hybrid algorithms
No Context Support Full Case
k = 0 No-RAG 0.8967
k = 1
Hybrid BERT - 0.8986 0.9068
Hybrid LegalBERT - 0.9020 0.9043
Hybrid AnglEBERT - 0.9121 0.9074
k = 3
Hybrid BERT 0.9007 0.8998
Hybrid LegalBERT - 0.9034 0.9045
Hybrid AnglEBERT - 0.9092 *0.9141
The Mistral-7B-open model was utilised as the LLM to generate the answers
given a question from a test case with the RAG context (formed using the CBRRAG retrieval approaches). The generated content was then converted to an
embedding using Mistral for cosine-based comparison with the expected answer
from the test case (i.e. reference text) for comparison, with the expectation that
higher the similarity the better the CBR-RAG setup.
Relatively high cosine scores were observed with the No-RAG baseline due to
the generator having parametric memory in most of the legal questions asked by
default. The best semantic similarity was noted with the Hybrid AnglEBERT
variant when 3 nearest neighbours were fed into the generator in the form of
full cases forming context for RAG. It provided answers on average with 1.94%
increase in performance. All hybrid variants performed better than the No-RAG
baseline. We also observed that including the full case in the prompt provided
better results compared to including only the Support text in most hybrid algorithms. Overall, Hybrid AnglEBERT outperforms the BERT and LegalBERT
variants with higher semantic similarity observed when k = 3.
We performed a series of ANOVA tests to evaluate whether results were significant. Following this we carried out paired tests between the best-performing
methods from each of the BERT and LegalBERT groups (in bold), as well as
the baseline No-RAG. Here we found that hybrid AnglEBERT k=3, significantly
outperforms (asterik) both ’No-RAG’ and hybrid LegalBERT k=3, at the 95%
confidence level, as shown by a one-tailed T-test. Against hybrid BERT k=1,
AnglEBERT k=3 shows significant improvement at the 90% confidence level.
7 Conclusions
In this paper we have presented CBR-RAG, improving LLM output by augmenting input with supporting information from a case-base of previous examples.
We have performed an empirical evaluation of different retrieval methods with
knowledge representation and comparison using BERT, LegalBERT, and AnglEBERT embeddings. Responses generated by CBR-RAG outperforms those of
baseline models in similarity to ground truth. Our findings confirm that using a

[TABLE page=14 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | No Context Support Full Case
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: k = 0 No-RAG | No Context Support Full Case: 0.8967
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: Hybrid BERT | No Context Support Full Case: - 0.8986 0.9068
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: k = 1 Hybrid LegalBERT | No Context Support Full Case: - 0.9020 0.9043
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Hybrid AnglEBERT | No Context Support Full Case: - 0.9121 0.9074
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Hybrid BERT | No Context Support Full Case: 0.9007 0.8998
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: k = 3 Hybrid LegalBERT | No Context Support Full Case: - 0.9034 0.9045
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: Hybrid AnglEBERT | No Context Support Full Case: - 0.9092 *0.9141
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 15]
CBR for RAG in LLMs for Legal QA 15
case-retrieval approach in RAG systems lead to clear performance benefits, but
selecting an appropriate embedding for case representation is key. A qualitative
analysis with a domain expert would be an ideal next step to validate these
results. The fact that AnglEBERT had the best performance suggests that its
contrastive approach to optimising for embeddings (based on similarity comparisons) remains more important than the standard self-supervised masked training
strategies used by LegalBERT, even if trained on general legal data. We note
that none of the embedding methods, including LegalBERT (trained on broader
legal collections), were fine-tuned to the ALQA-specific legal corpus. We are keen
to explore the impact of fine-tuning using contrastive self-supervision methods
and determine the necessary data supervision burdens for this process, which
could pose disadvantages in certain domains.
In future work, we aim to explore further opportunities within representation and specifically alternative methods for text embeddings. Moreover, given
the hybrid embeddings’ success, which combines multiple representations for
fine-grained similarity comparison, we are keen to expand CBR-RAG with more
retrieval capabilities. Finally, we found that combining multiple neighbours while
maintaining a coherent prompt is challenging, so we plan to explore case aggregation strategies in the future.
References
1. Aleven, V., Ashley, K.D.: Teaching case-based argumentation through a model and
examples: Empirical evaluation of an intelligent learning environment. In: Artificial
intelligence in education. vol. 39, pp. 87–94. Citeseer (1997)
2. Asai, A., Wu, Z., Wang, Y., Sil, A., Hajishirzi, H.: Self-rag: Learning to retrieve,
generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511
(2023)
3. Ashley, K.D.: Reasoning with cases and hypotheticals in hypo. International journal of man-machine studies 34(6), 753–796 (1991)
4. Bromley, J., Guyon, I., LeCun, Y., S¨ ackinger, E., Shah, R.: Signature verification using a” siamese” time delay neural network. Advances in neural information
processing systems 6 (1993)
5. Br¨ uninghaus, S., Ashley, K.D.: The role of information extraction for textual cbr.
In: International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning. pp. 74–89. Springer (2001)
6. Butler, U.: Open australian legal corpus (2024), https://huggingface.co/datasets/
umarbutler/open-australian-legal-corpus
7. Chalkidis, I., Fergadiotis, M., Malakasiotis, P., Aletras, N., Androutsopoulos, I.: Legal-bert: The muppets straight out of law school. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.02559 (2020)
8. Chalkidis, I., Jana, A., Hartung, D., Bommarito, M., Androutsopoulos, I., Katz,
D.M., Aletras, N.: Lexglue: A benchmark dataset for legal language understanding
in english (2022)
9. Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805
(2018)

[PAGE 16]
16 N. Wiratunga et al.
10. Guha, N., Nyarko, J., Ho, D.E., R´ e, C., Chilton, A., Narayana, A., Chohlas-Wood,
A., Peters, A., Waldon, B., Rockmore, D.N., Zambrano, D., Talisman, D., Hoque,
E., Surani, F., Fagan, F., Sarfaty, G., Dickinson, G.M., Porat, H., Hegland, J.,
Wu, J., Nudell, J., Niklaus, J., Nay, J., Choi, J.H., Tobia, K., Hagan, M., Ma,
M., Livermore, M., Rasumov-Rahe, N., Holzenberger, N., Kolt, N., Henderson, P.,
Rehaag, S., Goel, S., Gao, S., Williams, S., Gandhi, S., Zur, T., Iyer, V., Li, Z.:
Legalbench: A collaboratively built benchmark for measuring legal reasoning in
large language models (2023)
11. Hacker, P., Engel, A., Mauer, M.: Regulating chatgpt and other large generative ai
models. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency. pp. 1112–1123 (2023)
12. Jiang, A.Q., Sablayrolles, A., Mensch, A., Bamford, C., Chaplot, D.S., Casas,
D.d.l., Bressand, F., Lengyel, G., Lample, G., Saulnier, L., et al.: Mistral 7b. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.06825 (2023)
13. Lai, J., Gan, W., Wu, J., Qi, Z., Yu, P.S.: LLMs in law: A survey (2023)
14. Lee, J.S.: Lexgpt 0.1: pre-trained gpt-j models with pile of law (2023)
15. Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., K¨ uttler, H.,
Lewis, M., Yih, W.t., Rockt¨ aschel, T., et al.: Retrieval-augmented generation for
knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33, 9459–9474 (2020)
16. Li, X., Li, J.: Angle-optimized text embeddings (2023)
17. Rissland, E.L., Daniels, J.J.: A hybrid cbr-ir approach to legal information retrieval.
In: Proceedings of the 5th international conference on Artificial intelligence and
law. pp. 52–61 (1995)
18. Tang, C., Liu, Z., Ma, C., Wu, Z., Li, Y., Liu, W., Zhu, D., Li, Q., Li, X., Liu,
T., Fan, L.: Policygpt: Automated analysis of privacy policies with large language
models (2023)
19. Thulke, D., Daheim, N., Dugast, C., Ney, H.: Efficient retrieval augmented generation from unstructured knowledge for task-oriented dialog. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.04643 (2021)
20. Tuggener, D., von D¨ aniken, P., Peetz, T., Cieliebak, M.: LEDGAR: A large-scale
multi-label corpus for text classification of legal provisions in contracts. In: Calzolari, N., B´ echet, F., Blache, P., Choukri, K., Cieri, C., Declerck, T., Goggi, S.,
Isahara, H., Maegaard, B., Mariani, J., Mazo, H., Moreno, A., Odijk, J., Piperidis,
S. (eds.) Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. pp. 1235–1241. European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France
(May 2020), https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.155
21. Tuggener, D., von D¨ aniken, P., Peetz, T., Cieliebak, M.: LEDGAR: A large-scale
multi-label corpus for text classification of legal provisions in contracts. In: Calzolari, N., B´ echet, F., Blache, P., Choukri, K., Cieri, C., Declerck, T., Goggi, S.,
Isahara, H., Maegaard, B., Mariani, J., Mazo, H., Moreno, A., Odijk, J., Piperidis,
S. (eds.) Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. pp. 1235–1241. European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France
(May 2020), https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.155
22. Upadhyay, A., Massie, S.: A case-based approach for content planning in data-totext generation. In: International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning. pp. 380–
394. Springer (2022)
23. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser,
L., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017)

[PAGE 17]
CBR for RAG in LLMs for Legal QA 17
24. Wiratunga, N., Koychev, I., Massie, S.: Feature selection and generalisation for
retrieval of textual cases. In: European Conference on Case-Based Reasoning. pp.
806–820. Springer (2004)