[PAGE 1]
Conversational Topic Recommendation in Counseling and Psychotherapy
with Decision Transformer and Large Language Models
Aylin Gunal
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
gunala@umich.edu
Baihan Lin
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY
baihan.lin@mssm.edu
Djallel Bouneffouf
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
djallel.bouneffouf@ibm.com
Abstract
Given the increasing demand for mental health
assistance, artificial intelligence (AI), particularly large language models (LLMs), may be
valuable for integration into automated clinical support systems. In this work, we leverage
a decision transformer architecture for topic
recommendation in counseling conversations
between patients and mental health professionals. The architecture is utilized for offline reinforcement learning, and we extract states (dialogue turn embeddings), actions (conversation topics), and rewards (scores measuring the
alignment between patient and therapist) from
previous turns within a conversation to train a
decision transformer model. We demonstrate
an improvement over baseline reinforcement
learning methods, and propose a novel system
of utilizing our model’s output as synthetic labels for fine-tuning a large language model for
the same task. Although our implementation
based on LLaMA-2 7B has mixed results, future work can undoubtedly build on the design.
1 Introduction
In recent years, there has been a notable uptick in
the number of people seeking professional help for
mental health concerns, but the available pool of
mental health professionals remains small in comparison. To address this need, automated AI-based
tools and methods for counseling have been explored and engineered, ranging from systems for
training junior mental health counselors (Min et al.,
2022; Demasi et al., 2019) to AI-in-the-loop chatbots (Sharma et al., 2022). With the dramatic rise
in popularity and accessibility of large language
models (LLMs), it’s expected that LLMs will play
a significant role in the intersection of computing
and mental health research, as well.
In our prior work (Lin et al., 2023b), we introduced the SupervisorBot, a reinforcement learning
(RL)-based topic recommendation system in counseling conversations. This proves to be a useful
tool for clinicians during their psychotherapy sessions, where the system recommends what topics
to discuss next given what has been discussed so
far, as well as what works best in the past in terms
of the patient outcomes. In this work, we improve
upon this meaningful task by introducing the Decision Transformer (Chen et al., 2021), a transformer
model designed for reinforcement learning (RL),
into the recommendation pipeline, demonstrating
better performance than other RL methods. We
also explore the potential combination of Decision
Transformer with LLMs, by generating labels for
unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Decision Transformer model, and feeding the synthetically annotated data to fine-tuning a LLM. Our primary contribution is demonstrating that in the task
of topic recommendation, Decision Transformer
outperforms baseline RL methods; if such a system
were to go through the process of user testing, the
Decision Transformer––or models building on or
improving Decision Transformer––can be utilized
as the backbone for the recommendation module.
We first describe how we implement the preprocessing of the therapy conversation dataset, and
how this is fed into the Decision Transformer
model. We then describe how we use a portion
of the dataset to train the Decision Transformer
model, and that trained model’s predicted labels
are used as input to a large language model to train
for the same task of topic recommendation.
2 Related Work
Decision Transformer was introduced as a
transformer-based architecture to abstract the process of offline reinforcement learning, and has been
used successfully in various NLP tasks including
natural language understanding (Zhang et al., 2022;
Bucker et al., 2023), navigating text-based games
(Putterman et al., 2021), and generative language
modeling (Memisevic et al., 2022). The Decision
Transformer architecture has also been effectively
arXiv:2405.05060v1 [cs.CL] 8 May 2024

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | alignment between patient and therapist) from | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained DeciRow 1: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: previous turns within a conversation to train a | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: sion Transformer model, and feeding the synthetiRow 2: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: decision transformer model. We demonstrate | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: cally annotated data to fine-tuning a LLM. Our priRow 3: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: an improvement over baseline reinforcement | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: mary contribution is demonstrating that in the task
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: learning methods, and propose a novel system | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: of topic recommendation, Decision Transformer
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: of utilizing our model’s output as synthetic la- | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: outperforms baseline RL methods; if such a system
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: bels for fine-tuning a large language model for | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: were to go through the process of user testing, the
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: the same task. Although our implementation | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: based on LLaMA-2 7B has mixed results, fu- | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: Decision Transformer––or models building on or
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: ture work can undoubtedly build on the design. | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: improving Decision Transformer––can be utilized
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: as the backbone for the recommendation module.
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: 1 | alignment between patient and therapist) from: Introduction | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: We first describe how we implement the preRow 14: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: processing of the therapy conversation dataset, and
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: In recent years, there has been a notable uptick in | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: how this is fed into the Decision Transformer
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: the number of people seeking professional help for | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: model. We then describe how we use a portion
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: mental health concerns, but the available pool of | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: of the dataset to train the Decision Transformer
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: mental health professionals remains small in com- | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: model, and that trained model’s predicted labels
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: parison. To address this need, automated AI-based | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: are used as input to a large language model to train
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: tools and methods for counseling have been ex- | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: for the same task of topic recommendation.
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: plored and engineered, ranging from systems for | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: training junior mental health counselors (Min et al., | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: 2 Related Work
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: 2022; Demasi et al., 2019) to AI-in-the-loop chat- | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-:
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: bots (Sharma et al., 2022). With the dramatic rise | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: Decision Transformer was introduced as a
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: in popularity and accessibility of large language | alignment between patient and therapist) from: | unseen transcript data using the pre-trained Deci-: transformer-based architecture to abstract the pro-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
applied to the clinical domain to generate treatment recommendations based on patient history
(Lee et al., 2023). In this work, we effectively apply the Decision Transformer architecture to the
mental health domain in a dialogue recommendation task and improve on performances with older
reinforcement learning methods.
The improvement of AI-in-the-loop tools to support humans in tasks has typically focused on human feedback, although more recent work has explored the potential for AI tools to improve themselves through a number of methods. (Saunders
et al., 2022) demonstrates that a generative language model can improve its own outputs through
fine-tuning on its own generations, and that the
improvements are more significant as the model
size increases. Generative models also have the
advantage of being able to generate improvements
to their own outputs (Zelikman et al., 2023).
In addition to models improving themselves, ensemble methods in which one model serves some
intermediary purpose within the pipeline––e.g.
data generation or filtering for input to another
model––can be used for conversational modeling
tasks as well (Huang et al., 2023). (Stiennon et al.,
2020) uses an intermediary model’s output as a
reward function for another model, outperforming
sole supervised learning from the source dataset. In
this work, we explore a potential pipeline in which
one model’s output is used as synthetic data to train
a language model for the task of topic recommendation. We consider the idea of AI supplementing a typical reinforcement learning with human
feedback (RLHF) process by experimenting with
how AI may be able to augment feedback, which
can have significant implications given the lack of
publicly available mental health dialogue data, let
alone annotated data.
3 Architecture
In the following sections, we describe the architecture of our system in detail (see Fig. 1).
3.1 Decision Transformer
We re-implement the recommendation system
pipeline as described in our original paper, (Lin
et al., 2023b). This system is designed to provide
real-time feedback in the form of next-topic recommendation for mental health counselors in session
with patients, using reinforcement learning methods to learn and to recommend the next topic (the
action taken by the counselor) to move on from
the current segment of dialogue (the current state).
Rewards are calculated using working alliance inventory (WAI) (Horvath and Greenberg, 1989), a
score from a survey of questions to determine how
aligned a counselor is with their patient within a
session. WAI is determined by computing similarity between inventory items and segments of
dialogue (Lin et al., 2023a), and inventory items
fall under three different categories: Task, Bond,
and Goal. We include an aggregate WAI score,
referred to as Full.
The original SupervisorBot paper evaluates the
system’s performance on three baseline RL algorithms: DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015), TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018), and BCQ (Fujimoto et al.,
2019).
We use the Alex Street dataset 1, a dataset composed of counseling session transcripts for patients suffering from depression, anxiety, suicidal thoughts, and schizophrenia. The Alex Street
dataset is preprocessed and segmented into turnpairs, which are then embedded using Word2Vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013). We use embedded topic
modeling (Dieng et al., 2020) to extract 8 topics
from the corpus––as determined optimal by the
motivating paper––and label each turn-pair with
the topic it best represents. The WAI scores are
computed for each turn-pair. As the original system design is done, turn-pair embeddings represent
states, topic labels represent actions, and associated
W AI scores represent rewards. These items are fed
as input into the Decision Transformer in the form
of tuples of (rt, st, at).
We defer to the original Decision Transformer
paper for architecture details. Our model contains
a single-head, 3-layer attention mechanism, and
we use a context window of 20 for the baseline
results. Pearson’s correlation between the model
predicted actions and real actions taken is used for
evaluation for all experiments. We run experiments
5 times using a 95%/5% train-test split, and take
the average result.
3.2 LLMs for Recommendation
An attractive property of LLMs is flexibility in
usage; at their core they simply model language
probability distributions, making their outputs malleable to various tasks in NLP. In this section, we
1https://alexanderstreet.com/products/counseling-andpsychotherapy-transcripts-series

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: ment recommendations based on patient history | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).
Row 1: ment recommendations based on patient history: (Lee et al., 2023). In this work, we effectively ap- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: Rewards are calculated using working alliance inRow 2: ment recommendations based on patient history: ply the Decision Transformer architecture to the | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: ventory (WAI) (Horvath and Greenberg, 1989), a
Row 3: ment recommendations based on patient history: mental health domain in a dialogue recommenda- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: score from a survey of questions to determine how
Row 4: ment recommendations based on patient history: tion task and improve on performances with older | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: aligned a counselor is with their patient within a
Row 5: ment recommendations based on patient history: reinforcement learning methods. | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: session. WAI is determined by computing simRow 6: ment recommendations based on patient history: The improvement of AI-in-the-loop tools to sup- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: ilarity between inventory items and segments of
Row 7: ment recommendations based on patient history: port humans in tasks has typically focused on hu- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: dialogue (Lin et al., 2023a), and inventory items
Row 8: ment recommendations based on patient history: man feedback, although more recent work has ex- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: fall under three different categories: Task, Bond,
Row 9: ment recommendations based on patient history: plored the potential for AI tools to improve them- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: and Goal. We include an aggregate WAI score,
Row 10: ment recommendations based on patient history: selves through a number of methods. (Saunders | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: referred to as Full.
Row 11: ment recommendations based on patient history: et al., 2022) demonstrates that a generative lan- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: The original SupervisorBot paper evaluates the
Row 12: ment recommendations based on patient history: guage model can improve its own outputs through | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: system’s performance on three baseline RL algoRow 13: ment recommendations based on patient history: fine-tuning on its own generations, and that the | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: rithms: DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015), TD3 (FuRow 14: ment recommendations based on patient history: improvements are more significant as the model | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: jimoto et al., 2018), and BCQ (Fujimoto et al.,
Row 15: ment recommendations based on patient history: size increases. Generative models also have the | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: 2019).
Row 16: ment recommendations based on patient history: advantage of being able to generate improvements | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: We use the Alex Street dataset 1, a dataset comRow 17: ment recommendations based on patient history: to their own outputs (Zelikman et al., 2023). | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: posed of counseling session transcripts for paRow 18: ment recommendations based on patient history: In addition to models improving themselves, en- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: tients suffering from depression, anxiety, suiciRow 19: ment recommendations based on patient history: semble methods in which one model serves some | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: dal thoughts, and schizophrenia. The Alex Street
Row 20: ment recommendations based on patient history: intermediary purpose within the pipeline––e.g. | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: dataset is preprocessed and segmented into turnRow 21: ment recommendations based on patient history: data generation or filtering for input to another | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: pairs, which are then embedded using Word2Vec
Row 22: ment recommendations based on patient history: model––can be used for conversational modeling | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: (Mikolov et al., 2013). We use embedded topic
Row 23: ment recommendations based on patient history: tasks as well (Huang et al., 2023). (Stiennon et al., | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: modeling (Dieng et al., 2020) to extract 8 topics
Row 24: ment recommendations based on patient history: 2020) uses an intermediary model’s output as a | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: from the corpus––as determined optimal by the
Row 25: ment recommendations based on patient history: reward function for another model, outperforming | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: motivating paper––and label each turn-pair with
Row 26: ment recommendations based on patient history: sole supervised learning from the source dataset. In | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: the topic it best represents. The WAI scores are
Row 27: ment recommendations based on patient history: this work, we explore a potential pipeline in which | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: computed for each turn-pair. As the original sysRow 28: ment recommendations based on patient history: one model’s output is used as synthetic data to train | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: tem design is done, turn-pair embeddings represent
Row 29: ment recommendations based on patient history: a language model for the task of topic recommen- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: states, topic labels represent actions, and associated
Row 30: ment recommendations based on patient history: dation. We consider the idea of AI supplement- | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: WAI scores represent rewards. These items are fed
Row 31: ment recommendations based on patient history: ing a typical reinforcement learning with human | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: as input into the Decision Transformer in the form
Row 32: ment recommendations based on patient history: feedback (RLHF) process by experimenting with | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: of tuples of (rt, st, at).
Row 33: ment recommendations based on patient history: how AI may be able to augment feedback, which | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: We defer to the original Decision Transformer
Row 34: ment recommendations based on patient history: can have significant implications given the lack of | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: paper for architecture details. Our model contains
Row 35: ment recommendations based on patient history: publicly available mental health dialogue data, let | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: a single-head, 3-layer attention mechanism, and
Row 36: ment recommendations based on patient history: alone annotated data. | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: we use a context window of 20 for the baseline
Row 37: ment recommendations based on patient history: | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: results. Pearson’s correlation between the model
Row 38: ment recommendations based on patient history: 3 Architecture | the current segment of dialogue (the current state).: predicted actions and real actions taken is used for
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
Figure 1: Architecture of the proposed LLM integration, demonstrating how both gold-standard labels from the
dataset as well as synthetic annotations from Decision Transformer output can be used to fine-tune the LLM.
explore LLMs’ ability for dialogue classification
into labels of different psychiatric conditions to
demonstrate their usefulness in various components
of RLHF, similar to a diagnostic scenario in clinical
setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primarily experiment with LLaMA-2 with 7B parameters
(Touvron et al., 2023). We fine-tune LLaMA-2
model for sequence classification and test using
the same preprocessing steps and train-test split
described in Section 3.1. During the fine-tuning
process, we do not use a validation dataset to avoid
data leakage into the test set.
We experiment with treating Decision Transformer predictions as synthetic gold standard annotations for the LLM to learn from. We split the
full dataset in a 40%/40%/20% split; the first 40%
of the Alex Street dataset is used to train Decision
Transformer, then Decision Transformer outputs
predictions for another 40% of the dataset which
the LLM is then fine-tuned with, and ultimately the
LLM is evaluated on the final 20% of the dataset.
Due to computational constraints, we apply lowrank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021), a parameter efficient fine-tuning method, in order to
optimize the fine-tuning process. The LoRA configuration includes an alpha of 16 and dropout rate
of .05, and we fine-tune for 1 epoch. We target the
LLaMA-2 model’s attention layers during training
and save the final layer’s weights to avoid those
scores being randomly initialized for inference. To
provide some baseline for comparison, we additionally fine-tune the LLaMA-2 model on the original
gold-standard labels.
4 Evaluation
4.1 Results
The results of the Decision Transformer on a
95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the
original SupervisorBot paper, are provided in Table
1. We reproduce results for the other RL methods in the original paper for performance on the
full-scale rewards; Decision Transformer outperforms these baselines as noted in Table 3. We note
that Decision Transformer specifically performs
best for all reward scales when trained on the full
dataset; among individual diseases, the model performs best on the task, bond, and goal scales for
anxiety.
We additionally evaluate whether or not the 20timestep context is necessary for good performance
from the Decision Transformer model, and these results are provided in Table 2. We note that 15 timesteps is optimal for a majority of the reward sclaes,
suggesting that the Decision Transformer is better
able to make decisions provided a briefer learning
history. An advantage of utilizing a transformerbased model for this task is that we are able to investigate its internal structure to understand specifically which historical features––including which
time-steps––are significant for inference.
Additionally, we note that the LLaMA-2 model
trained on the gold-standard data does not necessarily outperform the Decision Transformer for all
reward scales as indicated in Table 4, indicating that
the off-the-shelf language model may not be conducive for a reinforcement learning task. LLaMA-2
trained on the Decision Transformer output directly

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar- | Unnamed: 0 | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the
Row 1: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: ily experiment with LLaMA-2 with 7B parameters | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: original SupervisorBot paper, are provided in Table
Row 2: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: (Touvron et al., 2023). We fine-tune LLaMA-2 | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: 1. We reproduce results for the other RL methRow 3: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: model for sequence classification and test using | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: ods in the original paper for performance on the
Row 4: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: the same preprocessing steps and train-test split | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: full-scale rewards; Decision Transformer outperRow 5: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: described in Section 3.1. During the fine-tuning | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: forms these baselines as noted in Table 3. We note
Row 6: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: process, we do not use a validation dataset to avoid | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: that Decision Transformer specifically performs
Row 7: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: data leakage into the test set. | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: best for all reward scales when trained on the full
Row 8: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: dataset; among individual diseases, the model perRow 9: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: We experiment with treating Decision Trans- | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: forms best on the task, bond, and goal scales for
Row 10: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: former predictions as synthetic gold standard an- | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: anxiety.
Row 11: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: notations for the LLM to learn from. We split the | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: We additionally evaluate whether or not the 20Row 12: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: full dataset in a 40%/40%/20% split; the first 40% | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: timestep context is necessary for good performance
Row 13: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: of the Alex Street dataset is used to train Decision | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: from the Decision Transformer model, and these reRow 14: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: Transformer, then Decision Transformer outputs | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: sults are provided in Table 2. We note that 15 timeRow 15: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: predictions for another 40% of the dataset which | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: steps is optimal for a majority of the reward sclaes,
Row 16: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: the LLM is then fine-tuned with, and ultimately the | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: suggesting that the Decision Transformer is better
Row 17: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: LLM is evaluated on the final 20% of the dataset. | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: able to make decisions provided a briefer learning
Row 18: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: Due to computational constraints, we apply low- | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: history. An advantage of utilizing a transformerRow 19: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021), a pa- | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: based model for this task is that we are able to inRow 20: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: rameter efficient fine-tuning method, in order to | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: vestigate its internal structure to understand specifRow 21: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: optimize the fine-tuning process. The LoRA con- | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: ically which historical features––including which
Row 22: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: figuration includes an alpha of 16 and dropout rate | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: time-steps––are significant for inference.
Row 23: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: of .05, and we fine-tune for 1 epoch. We target the | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: Additionally, we note that the LLaMA-2 model
Row 24: setting as in (Lin et al., 2022, 2024). We primar-: LLaMA-2 model’s attention layers during training | Unnamed: 0: | 95%/5% train-test split, reflecting the set-up of the: trained on the gold-standard data does not neces-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
Decision Transformer
Depression Anxiety Schizophrenia Suicidal All
Full .176 .233 .246 .213 .361
Task .291 .320 .247 .231 .323
Bond .270 .314 .231 .239 .335
Goal .291 .313 .249 .229 .375
Table 1: Results of Decision Transformer on topic recommendation task, using previous 20 turn-pairs as input. Best
results per data subset are in bold.
Context Lengths
Rewards 5 10 15 20
Full 0.346 0.345 0.403 0.361
Bond 0.284 0.343 0.359 0.335
Task 0.272 0.298 0.342 0.322
Goal 0.278 0.339 0.348 0.375
Table 2: Decision Transformer model performance
trained on varying context lengths. Best results per
reward scale are in bold.
DDPG BCQ TD3
Full .264 (-.97) .170 (-1.91) .286 (-.75)
Table 3: Baseline RL performance on full-scale rewards
on the full dataset, with a comparison to DT performance (the negative values suggest that these baselines
perform worse than our proposed DT-based recommendation model, which improves upon them).
also does not perform particularly well; future work
may include modifying the way in which the Decision Transformer synthetic labels are used by a
language model. It’s possible that prompting the
language model may yield better results than treating it as a sequence classifier.
4.2 Additional Analysis for Interpretability
We extract the final layer of attention weights from
the Decision Transformer models trained on the
four reward scales for the three types of inputs:
returns, states, and actions. We observe both the
attention weights for the individual input types as
well as the aggregated and averaged set of weights
Full Task Bond Goal
LLaMA-2 7B + DT .148 .118 .158 .115
LLaMA-2 7B + Gold .371 .259 .315 .332
Table 4: Results of fine-tuning LLaMA-2 7B on DT
output and gold-standard labels.
Figure 2: Normalized attention scores associated with
absolute timesteps, without padded sequences.
Figure 3: Normalized attention scores associated with
relative timesteps.

[PAGE 5]
aross all input types. Due to the auto-regressive
nature of Decision Transformer, attention weights
are assigned to the timesteps prior to the recommendation made at a given timestep.
We provide visual analyses of attention scores
through normalized aggregate attention scores per
timestep for absolute timestep values (Fig. 2) as
well as relative timestep values (Fig. 3). We note
that the model refines its attention to generally focus on items in earlier positions in given input sequence, both in the case for absolute and relative
timesteps. These results, in tandem with the generally higher performances of the model on 15 previous timesteps rather than 20 timesteps, indicate
that potentially there is a beginning index to the
current context that can be key for the model’s inference ability. Future work may include adjusting
the context window dynamically, both for training
and inference.
5 Limitations
Due to limitations of computational resources, experimentation with fine-tuning LLMs is restricted
by model size. Future work can build on this
work by applying similar experiments on increasing model sizes or non-quantized versions of models, effectively demonstrating (positively or negatively) that performance scales with model size.
6 Ethical Considerations
When implementing a topic recommendation system in counseling contexts, ethical considerations
are important due to the sensitive nature of digital mental health discussions, as discussed in (Lin,
2022). One of the primary concerns is the potential limitation imposed by a static set of discussion
topics. While such a system can streamline the
counseling process, it risks limiting the creativity
and flexibility of counselors, particularly those in
training, and in the long term, inhibit consideration
of their own perspectives on how to continue the
conversation. This could inadvertently restrict their
ability to tailor sessions according to the unique
needs of each patient.
This is particularly relevant since the topics
pulled are from one specific dataset that covers
only four mental health conditions. The training
dataset, derived from this limited number of mental
health conditions, might not be representative of the
broader population or other conditions. This limitation can lead to biased recommendations if not
carefully managed. To mitigate this, it is essential
to consider a more dynamic approach where the set
of topics can evolve based on ongoing input from
practicing counselors and feedback from therapy
sessions. This adaptation would help in maintaining the relevance and sensitivity of the recommendations to diverse patient needs. In deployment,
we can also imagine that topics are dynamically
chosen, or chosen using human feedback; for example, perhaps before the system is put into use,
counselors can input their own topics.
In addition to dataset limitations, the calculation of rewards, based on the Working Alliance
Inventory (WAI), while rooted in established psychological theory, may benefit from enhancements
through reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF). Incorporating direct input from users
could refine the understanding and alignment of
counselor and patient goals, improving the system’s effectiveness and ethical alignment.
7 Conclusion
In this study, we introduced a DecisionTransformer-based recommendation system which
outperforms baseline RL-based methods in counseling topic recommendation, indicating that
transformer-based methods may have better performance in general when it comes to modeling conversation direction and alignment. We additionally
find that the model performs best for certain reward
scales on shorter input sequences, indicating that
some exploration of optimal sequence length can
be an avenue for future work. Through additional
analysis of the attention scores, we additionally
find that the model pays more attention to items
earlier on in the input sequence.
References
Arthur Bucker, Luis Figueredo, Sami Haddadin, Ashish
Kapoor, Shuang Ma, Sai Vemprala, and Rogerio Bonatti. 2023. Latte: Language trajectory transformer.
In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pages 7287–7294. IEEE.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee,
Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, P. Abbeel, A. Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. 2021. Decision transformer:
Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. In
Neural Information Processing Systems.
Orianna Demasi, Marti A. Hearst, and Benjamin Recht.
2019. Towards augmenting crisis counselor training
by improving message retrieval. Proceedings of the

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: We provide visual analyses of attention scores | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintainRow 1: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: through normalized aggregate attention scores per | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: ing the relevance and sensitivity of the recommenRow 2: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: timestep for absolute timestep values (Fig. 2) as | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: dations to diverse patient needs. In deployment,
Row 3: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: well as relative timestep values (Fig. 3). We note | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: we can also imagine that topics are dynamically
Row 4: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: that the model refines its attention to generally fo- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: chosen, or chosen using human feedback; for exRow 5: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: cus on items in earlier positions in given input se- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: ample, perhaps before the system is put into use,
Row 6: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: quence, both in the case for absolute and relative | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: counselors can input their own topics.
Row 7: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: timesteps. These results, in tandem with the gener- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: In addition to dataset limitations, the calculaRow 8: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: ally higher performances of the model on 15 pre- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: tion of rewards, based on the Working Alliance
Row 9: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: vious timesteps rather than 20 timesteps, indicate | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: Inventory (WAI), while rooted in established psyRow 10: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: that potentially there is a beginning index to the | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: chological theory, may benefit from enhancements
Row 11: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: current context that can be key for the model’s in- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: through reinforcement learning with human feedRow 12: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: ference ability. Future work may include adjusting | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: back (RLHF). Incorporating direct input from users
Row 13: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: the context window dynamically, both for training | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: could refine the understanding and alignment of
Row 14: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: and inference. | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: counselor and patient goals, improving the sysRow 15: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: tem’s effectiveness and ethical alignment.
Row 16: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: 5 Limitations | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 17: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: 7 Conclusion
Row 18: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: Due to limitations of computational resources, ex- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 19: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: perimentation with fine-tuning LLMs is restricted | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: In this study, we introduced a DecisionRow 20: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: by model size. Future work can build on this | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: Transformer-based recommendation system which
Row 21: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: work by applying similar experiments on increas- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: outperforms baseline RL-based methods in counRow 22: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: ing model sizes or non-quantized versions of mod- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: seling topic recommendation, indicating that
Row 23: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: els, effectively demonstrating (positively or nega- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: transformer-based methods may have better perforRow 24: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: tively) that performance scales with model size. | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: mance in general when it comes to modeling conRow 25: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: versation direction and alignment. We additionally
Row 26: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: 6 Ethical Considerations | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: find that the model performs best for certain reward
Row 27: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: scales on shorter input sequences, indicating that
Row 28: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: When implementing a topic recommendation sys- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 29: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: some exploration of optimal sequence length can
Row 30: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: tem in counseling contexts, ethical considerations | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 31: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: be an avenue for future work. Through additional
Row 32: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: are important due to the sensitive nature of digi- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 33: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: analysis of the attention scores, we additionally
Row 34: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: tal mental health discussions, as discussed in (Lin, | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 35: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: find that the model pays more attention to items
Row 36: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: 2022). One of the primary concerns is the poten- | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 37: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: earlier on in the input sequence.
Row 38: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: tial limitation imposed by a static set of discussion | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 39: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: topics. While such a system can streamline the | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 40: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: counseling process, it risks limiting the creativity | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 41: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: References
Row 42: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: and flexibility of counselors, particularly those in | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-:
Row 43: We provide visual analyses of attention scores: training, and in the long term, inhibit consideration | sessions. This adaptation would help in maintain-: Arthur Bucker, Luis Figueredo, Sami Haddadin, Ashish
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
Sixth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and
Clinical Psychology.
Adji B Dieng, Francisco JR Ruiz, and David M Blei.
2020. Topic modeling in embedding spaces. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:439–453.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. 2018.
Addressing function approximation error in actorcritic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1587–1596. PMLR.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. 2019.
Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without exploration. In International conference on machine
learning, pages 2052–2062. PMLR.
Adam O Horvath and Leslie S. Greenberg. 1989. Development and validation of the working alliance inventory. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 36:223–
233.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan
Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.09685.
Xin Huang, Kye Min Tan, Richeng Duan, and Bowei
Zou. 2023. Ensemble method via ranking model
for conversational modeling with subjective knowledge. In Proceedings of The Eleventh Dialog System
Technology Challenge, pages 177–184.
Seunghyun Lee, Da Young Lee, Sujeong Im, Nan Hee
Kim, and Sung-Min Park. 2023. Clinical decision transformer: intended treatment recommendation through goal prompting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.00612.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel,
Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. 2015. Continuous control
with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.02971.
Baihan Lin. 2022. Computational inference in cognitive
science: Operational, societal and ethical considerations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13526.
Baihan Lin, Djallel Bouneffouf, Yulia Landa, Rachel
Jespersen, Cheryl Corcoran, and Guillermo Cecchi.
2024. Compass: Computational mapping of patienttherapist alliance strategies with language modeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14701.
Baihan Lin, Guillermo Cecchi, and Djallel Bouneffouf. 2022. Working alliance transformer for psychotherapy dialogue classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.15603.
Baihan Lin, Guillermo Cecchi, and Djallel Bouneffouf.
2023a. Deep annotation of therapeutic working alliance in psychotherapy. In International workshop
on health intelligence, pages 193–207. Springer.
Baihan Lin, Guillermo Cecchi, and Djallel Bouneffouf.
2023b. Supervisorbot: Nlp-annotated real-time recommendations of psychotherapy treatment strategies
with deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 7149–7153.
Roland Memisevic, Sunny Panchal, and Mingu Lee.
2022. Decision making as language generation. In
NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Gregory S.
Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Neural Information Processing Systems.
Do June Min, Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Kenneth Resnicow, and Rada Mihalcea. 2022. Pair: Prompt-aware
margin ranking for counselor reflection scoring in
motivational interviewing. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Aaron L Putterman, Kevin Lu, Igor Mordatch, and
Pieter Abbeel. 2021. Pretraining for language conditioned imitation with transformers.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills,
Ouyang Long, Jonathan Ward, and Jan Leike. 2022.
Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators.
ArXiv, abs/2206.05802.
Ashish Sharma, Inna Wanyin Lin, Adam S. Miner,
David C. Atkins, and Tim Althoff. 2022. Human–ai
collaboration enables more empathic conversations
in text-based peer-to-peer mental health support. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5:46–57.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel
Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea V oss, Alec Radford,
Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–
3021.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro,
Faisal Azhar, et al. 2023. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.13971.
E. Zelikman, Eliana Lorch, Lester Mackey, and
Adam Tauman Kalai. 2023. Self-taught optimizer
(stop): Recursively self-improving code generation.
ArXiv, abs/2310.02304.
Ziqi Zhang, Yile Wang, Yue Zhang, and Donglin
Wang. 2022. Can offline reinforcement learning
help natural language understanding? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.03864.