[PAGE 1]
CASE GPT: A C ASE REASONING FRAMEWORK BASED ON
LANGUAGE MODELS AND RETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED
GENERATION ∗
RUI YANG
University of California, Riverside
Riverside, USA
ryang088@ucr.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces CaseGPT, an innovative framework that synergizes Large Language Models
(LLMs) and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) technology to enhance case-based reasoning in
healthcare and legal domains. CaseGPT addresses the inherent limitations of traditional database
queries by facilitating semantic searches based on contextual understanding, thereby significantly
improving data accessibility and utility. Our system not only retrieves pertinent cases but also
generates nuanced insights and recommendations by discerning intricate patterns within existing
case data. We evaluate CaseGPT using comprehensive datasets from both medical and legal fields,
demonstrating substantial improvements over state-of-the-art baselines. In medical diagnosis tasks,
CaseGPT achieves a 15% increase in F1 score compared to traditional methods, while in legal
precedent retrieval, it exhibits a 12% improvement in precision. These results underscore CaseGPT’s
potential to revolutionize information retrieval and decision support in complex professional domains,
offering a paradigm shift in how practitioners access, analyze, and leverage case data.
Keywords: Large Language Models, Retrieval-Augmented Generation, Case-Based Reasoning,
Healthcare Informatics, Legal Informatics
1 Introduction
The exponential proliferation of digital case data in professional domains such as medicine and law presents both
unprecedented opportunities and formidable challenges. While this wealth of information has the potential to significantly inform decision-making processes and enhance outcomes, traditional database query systems often fall short
in effectively leveraging this vast corpus of data [1]. These conventional systems, primarily reliant on exact keyword
matches, struggle to capture the nuanced and complex nature of professional terminologies and contextual information
[2].
The primary challenges in case-based reasoning within these specialized domains are multifaceted and interrelated.
Firstly, there is the issue of handling imprecise or incomplete queries that reflect the ambiguity often present in
real-world scenarios. Secondly, understanding the semantic context of queries and cases beyond simple keyword
matching requires sophisticated natural language processing capabilities. Lastly, generating meaningful insights and
recommendations based on retrieved cases demands advanced analytical and inferential abilities.
To address these interconnected challenges, we propose CaseGPT, a novel framework that harnesses the power of Large
Language Models (LLMs) and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) technology. CaseGPT represents a significant
advancement in the field, offering several key innovations:
∗Citation: Yang, R. CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework Based on Language Models and Retrieval-Augmented
Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:XXXX.XXXXX, 2024.
arXiv:2407.07913v1 [cs.IR] 4 Jul 2024

[PAGE 2]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
CaseGPT employs deep semantic understanding of queries and cases, enabling a more flexible and intuitive search
process that captures the underlying meaning and context of the information. This approach allows for a more natural
interaction between users and the system, bridging the gap between human language and machine interpretation.
The framework implements contextual retrieval of relevant cases based on sophisticated semantic matching algorithms.
This method goes beyond surface-level similarities to identify cases that are conceptually related, even when the specific
terminology might differ.
Perhaps most significantly, CaseGPT generates insights and recommendations by analyzing complex patterns in
retrieved cases. This capability transforms the system from a mere retrieval tool to an intelligent assistant capable of
providing valuable analytical support to professionals.
Our work builds upon and extends recent advancements in natural language processing and information retrieval,
applying these cutting-edge technologies to specialized professional domains. By synergizing the strengths of LLMs in
understanding and generating human-like text with the precision of RAG in retrieving relevant information, CaseGPT
represents a paradigm shift in case-based reasoning systems.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a comprehensive review of related work in
the field, situating our contribution within the broader context of AI applications in professional domains. Section 3
elucidates the methodology underlying CaseGPT, detailing its architecture and key components. Section 4 presents our
experimental setup and results, offering a rigorous evaluation of the system’s performance. Section 5 discusses the
implications of our findings, addressing both the potential impact and the ethical considerations of deploying such a
system in sensitive professional contexts. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper, summarizing our contributions and
outlining promising directions for future research.
2 Related Work
The application of advanced natural language processing techniques to case-based reasoning in professional domains
has emerged as a vibrant area of research in recent years. This section provides a structured overview of related work,
highlighting key areas of development and the gaps our research aims to address.
Language Models in Professional Domains Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential in understanding and generating domain-specific text. Schilder [3] conducted a critical analysis of LLMs
as intelligent assistance technology in the legal domain, highlighting both the transformative potential and the
necessity for human oversight. This work underscores the delicate balance between leveraging AI capabilities
and maintaining professional judgment in sensitive fields.
In the medical arena, Saripan et al. [4] explored the implications of AI, including LLMs, on informed consent
and medical negligence. Their research illuminates the complex ethical and legal landscape surrounding the
integration of AI technologies in healthcare decision-making processes.
Information Retrieval in Specialized Domains The unique challenges of domain-specific search have been a focal
point of research in information retrieval. Hanbury [ 1] provided a comprehensive overview of medical
information retrieval, emphasizing the need for tailored approaches that can handle the complexity and
specificity of medical terminology and concepts.
Hovorushchenko et al. [ 2] proposed an ontology-based approach for information retrieval in medical law,
demonstrating the importance of structured knowledge representation in navigating the intersection of medical
and legal domains. Their work highlights the potential of semantic technologies in enhancing the precision
and relevance of information retrieval in specialized fields.
Innovative Search Techniques Recent research has focused on addressing the challenges of imprecise queries and
enhancing retrieval accuracy:
• Fuzzy Search and Query Expansion: Srivel et al. [5] introduced a fuzzy-based Grasshopper Optimization
Algorithm for query expansion in medical datasets. This approach aims to bridge the gap between user
queries and formal medical terminology.
• Semantic Clustering: Chawla [6] applied fuzzy c-means clustering and semantic ontologies to web query
session mining, advancing intelligent information retrieval.
• Legal Case Retrieval: Zhang et al. [ 7] developed a Diversified Legal Case Retrieval Model (DLRM)
considering both topical relevance and related subtopics. Liu et al. [ 8] compared conversational and
traditional search approaches in legal case retrieval, suggesting the potential of interactive interfaces.
Ethical Considerations and Limitations As AI systems become more prevalent in sensitive domains, ethical implications have come to the forefront. Frihat et al. [9] discussed the importance of considering document difficulty

[PAGE 3]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
for medical practitioners in personalized search engines, highlighting the need for AI systems to adapt to
varying levels of user expertise.
Research Gap While these studies have made significant contributions to their respective fields, there remains a
notable gap in integrating advanced language models with retrieval-augmented generation for case-based reasoning
across multiple professional domains. Our work aims to bridge this gap by introducing CaseGPT, a framework that
synergizes the semantic understanding capabilities of LLMs with the precision of RAG technology. This integrated
approach has the potential to address the complex challenges of case-based reasoning in a more holistic and effective
manner than previous methods.
3 Methodology
CaseGPT represents a novel integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) technology, designed to create a robust framework for case-based reasoning. This section provides a detailed
exposition of the components and processes that constitute our system.
3.1 System Architecture
The architecture of CaseGPT is composed of three primary modules, each designed to address specific aspects of the
case-based reasoning process:
• Query Processing Module
• Case Retrieval Engine
• Insight Generation Module
Figure 1 illustrates the high-level architecture and information flow within CaseGPT.
Figure 1: High-level architecture of CaseGPT
3.2 Query Processing Module
The Query Processing Module serves as the interface between user inputs and the underlying case retrieval and
analysis systems. This module leverages a pre-trained LLM to parse and interpret the semantic context of user queries,
transforming them into a format optimized for subsequent processing. We employ a state-of-the-art LLM, such as GPT-3
or a domain-specific variant, to tokenize and encode the input query. This process involves breaking down the query
into semantic units and mapping them to high-dimensional vectors that capture nuanced meanings and relationships.
The tokenization and encoding process is formalized in Algorithm 1.

[PAGE 4]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
Algorithm 1 LLM Tokenization and Encoding Process
1: procedure TOKENIZE ANDENCODE (Query)
2: EncodedQuery ← ∅
3: for each Sentence in Query do
4: SentenceT okens ← SplitIntoWords(Sentence)
5: for each W ord in SentenceT okens do
6: EncodedT oken ← LLMEncode(W ord)
7: EncodedQuery ← EncodedQuery ∪ {EncodedT oken}
8: end for
9: end for
10: return EncodedQuery
11: end procedure
The LLMEncode function represents the sophisticated encoding process of the LLM, which maps words to highdimensional vectors that capture semantic meaning within the context of the entire query.
3.3 Case Retrieval Engine
The Case Retrieval Engine constitutes the core component of our CaseGPT framework, responsible for identifying
and retrieving the most relevant cases based on processed queries. This engine leverages state-of-the-art RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) technology [ 17], significantly advancing beyond traditional information retrieval
methods. The engine’s architecture comprises two primary components: the Dense Vector Index and the Semantic
Search Algorithm.
3.3.1 Dense Vector Index
Central to our retrieval system is a meticulously maintained dense vector index of all cases in our database. This index
serves as a high-dimensional semantic map of our case repository, enabling efficient and accurate case retrieval. The
construction and maintenance of this index involve several key aspects:
1. Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM)
employed for query processing. We utilize a variant of the BERT architecture [ 18], fine-tuned on domainspecific corpora to enhance its understanding of legal and medical terminologies. This consistent approach
ensures semantic coherence across the entire system.
2. Vector Representation: Cases are transformed into dense vectors, typically of 768 to 1024 dimensions, capturing intricate semantic nuances. This high-dimensional representation allows for fine-grained differentiation
between cases, crucial for handling the complexity of legal and medical domains [19].
3. Index Structure: To facilitate rapid similarity search in high-dimensional spaces, we implement an efficient
indexing structure. Specifically, we employ the Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) algorithm [20],
which offers an optimal balance between search speed and accuracy.
4. Dynamic Updates: Our system supports real-time index updates, allowing for the seamless integration of
new cases. This is achieved through an incremental indexing mechanism, ensuring that the retrieval system
remains current without necessitating complete reindexing [21].
3.3.2 Semantic Search Algorithm
The semantic search algorithm forms the operational core of our retrieval engine, responsible for matching encoded
queries with the most semantically relevant cases. Our approach transcends traditional keyword matching, delving into
deeper semantic relationships between queries and cases. The algorithm encompasses several sophisticated components:
1. Similarity Metric: We employ cosine similarity as our primary metric, chosen for its effectiveness in capturing
semantic relatedness in high-dimensional spaces. This choice is supported by extensive empirical studies in
semantic textual similarity tasks [22].
2. Query-Case Matching: The algorithm computes the cosine similarity between the encoded query vector
and each case vector in the index. To optimize this process, we utilize approximate nearest neighbor search
techniques, specifically the FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search) library [23], which allows for sub-linear
time complexity in similarity computations.

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: 1. | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM)
Row 1: 1.: | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): employed for query processing. We utilize a variant of the BERT architecture [18], fine-tuned on domainRow 2: 1.: | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): specific corpora to enhance its understanding of legal and medical terminologies. This consistent approach
Row 3: 1.: | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): ensures semantic coherence across the entire system.
Row 4: 1.: 2.0 | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): Vector Representation: Cases are transformed into dense vectors, typically of 768 to 1024 dimensions, capRow 5: 1.: | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): turing intricate semantic nuances. This high-dimensional representation allows for fine-grained differentiation
Row 6: 1.: | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): between cases, crucial for handling the complexity of legal and medical domains [19].
Row 7: 1.: 3.0 | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): Index Structure: To facilitate rapid similarity search in high-dimensional spaces, we implement an efficient
Row 8: 1.: | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): indexing structure. Specifically, we employ the Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) algorithm [20],
Row 9: 1.: | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): which offers an optimal balance between search speed and accuracy.
Row 10: 1.: 4.0 | Encoding Methodology: Each case undergoes encoding using the same Large Language Model (LLM): Dynamic Updates: Our system supports real-time index updates, allowing for the seamless integration of
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
3. Ranking Mechanism: Retrieved cases are initially ranked based on their cosine similarity scores. Subsequently, we apply a re-ranking step that incorporates additional domain-specific factors such as case recency,
citation frequency, and jurisdictional relevance. This multi-factor ranking approach is inspired by learning-torank methodologies in information retrieval [24].
4. Diversity-Aware Retrieval:To ensure a comprehensive set of results, we implement a diversity-aware retrieval
mechanism. This approach, based on the MaximumMarginal Relevance (MMR) principle [ 25], balances
between relevance and diversity in the retrieved set of cases.
The core retrieval process is formalized in Algorithm 2, which efficiently narrows down the search space using
approximate nearest neighbor techniques before computing precise similarity scores and applying the re-ranking
mechanism.
Algorithm 2 RAG-based Case Retrieval Algorithm
1: procedure RETRIEVE CASES (EncodedQuery, N, Index )
2: QueryV ector ← NormalizeVector(EncodedQuery )
3: Candidates ← ApproximateNearestNeighbors(Index, QueryV ector, k )
4: RankedCases ← ∅
5: for each Case in Candidates do
6: Similarity ← CosineSimilarity(QueryV ector, Case.V ector )
7: RankedCases.insert({Case, Similarity })
8: end for
9: RankedCases ← Sort(RankedCases, key=Similarity, descending=True)
10: DiverseResults ← ApplyMMR(RankedCases, QueryV ector, N )
11: return DiverseResults
12: end procedure
This advanced retrieval mechanism forms the cornerstone of CaseGPT’s ability to swiftly and accurately identify
relevant cases, providing a robust foundation for subsequent insight generation and decision support. The synergy
between the Dense Vector Index and the Semantic Search Algorithm enables CaseGPT to perform nuanced, contextaware case retrieval, significantly outperforming traditional keyword-based methods, particularly in handling complex,
domain-specific queries in legal and medical contexts.
3.4 Insight Generation Module
In developing CaseGPT, we realized that mere case retrieval, while useful, falls short of the analytical support legal and
medical professionals often require. This realization led us to design the Insight Generation Module, a component that
aims to bridge the gap between raw information retrieval and actionable insights. At its core, this module leverages Large
Language Models (LLMs) to analyze retrieved cases in the context of the user’s query, generating recommendations
and analyses that we hope will prove valuable in practice.
Our approach to insight generation builds on two main pillars: context aggregation and conditional text generation.
The context aggregation process, which we admittedly found more challenging than initially anticipated, involves
synthesizing information from the retrieved cases and the original query. We experimented with several summarization
techniques before settling on a hybrid approach that seemed to strike a balance between capturing key details and
maintaining readability. Query expansion also proved crucial, helping to capture related concepts that users might not
explicitly mention but are often relevant to their needs.
One of the trickier aspects we encountered was determining how to weight different parts of the aggregated context.
After much trial and error, we implemented a weighting scheme inspired by attention mechanisms in transformer
models. While not perfect, this approach has shown promise in prioritizing the most pertinent information for insight
generation.
The conditional generation process presented its own set of challenges. Constructing effective prompts for the
LLM required numerous iterations and extensive testing. We found that the quality of generated insights could vary
significantly based on subtle changes in prompt wording. This sensitivity to prompt design is an area we believe
warrants further research.
To illustrate our process, we’ve included a simplified version of our insight generation algorithm 3:

[PAGE 6]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
Algorithm 3 Insight Generation Process
1: procedure GENERATE INSIGHTS (Query, RetrievedCases )
2: Context ← AggregateContext(Query, RetrievedCases )
3: P rompt ← ConstructPrompt(Context)
4: InitialInsights ← LLMGenerate(P rompt)
5: Ref inedInsights ← IterativeRefine(InitialInsights, Context )
6: V erif iedInsights ← FactCheck(Ref inedInsights, RetrievedCases )
7: return V erif iedInsights
8: end procedure
It’s worth noting that while this algorithm appears straightforward, each step involves complex sub-processes that we’re
continuing to refine. The LLMGenerate function, for instance, represents a sophisticated text generation process that
we’ve fine-tuned extensively for our specific use cases.
One aspect of our module that we’re particularly proud of is the iterative refinement process. Initial results showed that
a single pass often produced insights that, while relevant, lacked the depth we were aiming for. By implementing an
iterative approach, we’ve seen a marked improvement in the nuance and comprehensiveness of the generated insights.
However, we must acknowledge that our current approach is not without limitations. The factual consistency checking
mechanism, while crucial, is not infallible. We’ve observed cases where the system generates plausible-sounding but
incorrect information, a problem that we’re actively working to address. Additionally, the performance of the module
can vary depending on the complexity of the legal or medical case at hand, and we’re still in the process of gathering
more comprehensive performance metrics across a wider range of scenarios.
Despite these challenges, we believe that the Insight Generation Module represents a significant step forward in
AI-assisted legal and medical analysis. By combining advanced NLP techniques with domain-specific knowledge,
we’ve created a tool that we hope will augment human expertise in these critical fields. As we continue to refine and
expand this technology, we remain committed to rigorous testing and validation to ensure its reliability and usefulness
in real-world applications.
4 Experiments
To rigorously evaluate the efficacy of CaseGPT, we conducted comprehensive experiments in both medical and legal
domains. This section delineates our experimental methodology, datasets, baseline comparisons, and results.
4.1 Datasets
We utilized two substantial real-world datasets for our experiments:
Medical Dataset: Our medical dataset comprises 100,000 anonymized medical cases obtained from a large urban
hospital network. These cases span a diverse range of medical specialties and include detailed patient symptoms,
diagnostic procedures, final diagnoses, and treatment outcomes. The dataset was carefully curated to ensure a
representative distribution of case complexities and medical conditions.
Legal Dataset: Our legal dataset encompasses 50,000 court case summaries from various jurisdictions, covering
multiple areas of law including criminal, civil, and administrative cases. Each case summary includes a detailed
description of the facts, relevant statutes, court decisions, and case outcomes. The dataset was carefully compiled to
represent a broad spectrum of legal complexities and precedents.
4.2 Experimental Setup
To ensure a robust evaluation of CaseGPT, we implemented a rigorous experimental protocol:
• Data Preprocessing: Both datasets underwent extensive preprocessing to ensure data quality and consistency.
This involved anonymization of sensitive information, standardization of terminologies, and normalization of
text formats. For the medical dataset, we employed ICD-10 codes for diagnosis standardization, while legal
cases were categorized using a standardized legal taxonomy.

[PAGE 7]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
• Training and Testing Split: We employed a stratified random sampling technique to divide each dataset
into training (80%) and testing (20%) sets. The stratification ensured that the distribution of case types and
complexities was maintained across both sets, mitigating potential biases in our evaluation.
• Query Generation: To simulate real-world usage scenarios, we developed a query generation framework that
produced a diverse set of test queries. For the medical domain, these queries ranged from simple symptom
descriptions to complex multi-symptom scenarios. In the legal domain, queries included case fact patterns,
legal issues, and precedent searches.
4.3 Baseline Systems
To contextualize CaseGPT’s performance, we implemented and compared against several state-of-the-art baseline
systems:
• TF-IDF with BM25: A traditional information retrieval system using Term Frequency-Inverse Document
Frequency weighting and the BM25 ranking function.
• BERT-based Retrieval: A neural retrieval model leveraging BERT embeddings for semantic matching [18].
• GPT-3 Zero-shot: Utilizing GPT-3 in a zero-shot setting for both case retrieval and insight generation.
• LEGAL-BERT: A BERT model fine-tuned on legal corpora, specifically used for the legal domain experiments
[11].
• BioBERT: A biomedical language representation model, employed for the medical domain experiments [12].
4.4 Evaluation Metrics
We employed a comprehensive set of evaluation metrics to assess various aspects of system performance:
• Precision@k: The proportion of relevant cases among the top k retrieved cases.
• Recall@k: The proportion of relevant cases that are retrieved in the top k results.
• F1 Score: The harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a balanced measure of retrieval performance.
• Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR): Evaluating the ranking quality of the retrieval system.
• Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG): Assessing the ranking quality while accounting for the
position of relevant documents.
• Response Time: Measuring the computational efficiency of each system.
For the insight generation component, we conducted a rigorous human evaluation. A panel of domain experts assessed
the generated insights on a 5-point Likert scale across three dimensions: quality, relevance, and actionability.
4.5 Results and Analysis
4.5.1 Medical Domain Performance
Table 1 presents the comparative performance of CaseGPT and baseline systems in the medical domain.
Table 1: Performance Comparison for Medical Case Retrieval
System P@10 R@10 F1 MRR NDCG@10 Time (s)
TF-IDF + BM25 0.68 0.65 0.66 0.72 0.70 1.0
BERT-based 0.75 0.72 0.73 0.78 0.76 0.9
GPT-3 Zero-shot 0.79 0.76 0.77 0.81 0.80 1.2
BioBERT 0.82 0.80 0.81 0.85 0.83 0.8
CaseGPT 0.90 0.88 0.89 0.92 0.91 0.5
CaseGPT demonstrates superior performance across all metrics in the medical domain. Notably, it achieves a 15
The substantial improvement in MRR and NDCG@10 scores underscores CaseGPT’s proficiency in not just retrieving
relevant cases, but also ranking them effectively. This is particularly crucial in medical contexts where the most relevant
information needs to be readily accessible to healthcare professionals.

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: System | P@10 | R@10 | F1 | MRR | NDCG@10 | Time (s)
Row 1: System: TF-IDF + BM25 | P@10: 0.68 | R@10: 0.65 | F1: 0.66 | MRR: 0.72 | NDCG@10: 0.7 | Time (s): 1.0
Row 2: System: BERT-based | P@10: 0.75 | R@10: 0.72 | F1: 0.73 | MRR: 0.78 | NDCG@10: 0.76 | Time (s): 0.9
Row 3: System: GPT-3 Zero-shot | P@10: 0.79 | R@10: 0.76 | F1: 0.77 | MRR: 0.81 | NDCG@10: 0.8 | Time (s): 1.2
Row 4: System: BioBERT | P@10: 0.82 | R@10: 0.8 | F1: 0.81 | MRR: 0.85 | NDCG@10: 0.83 | Time (s): 0.8
Row 5: System: CaseGPT | P@10: 0.9 | R@10: 0.88 | F1: 0.89 | MRR: 0.92 | NDCG@10: 0.91 | Time (s): 0.5
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
Furthermore, CaseGPT’s reduced response time (0.5 seconds compared to 0.8-1.2 seconds for other methods) demonstrates its efficiency, a critical factor in time-sensitive medical decision-making scenarios.
4.5.2 Legal Domain Performance
Table 2 illustrates the performance comparison in the legal domain.
Table 2: Performance Comparison for Legal Case Retrieval
System P@10 R@10 F1 MRR NDCG@10 Time (s)
TF-IDF + BM25 0.72 0.70 0.71 0.75 0.74 1.2
BERT-based 0.79 0.77 0.78 0.82 0.81 1.0
GPT-3 Zero-shot 0.83 0.81 0.82 0.86 0.85 1.3
LEGAL-BERT 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.89 0.88 0.9
CaseGPT 0.93 0.90 0.91 0.94 0.93 0.8
In the legal domain, CaseGPT exhibits a similar pattern of superior performance. It achieves a 12
The notable increase in MRR and NDCG@10 scores reflects CaseGPT’s ability to effectively rank legal cases, ensuring
that the most relevant precedents and statutes are prioritized in the results. This capability is particularly valuable in
legal research, where the identification of the most pertinent cases can significantly impact case outcomes.
4.5.3 Insight Generation Quality
Table 3 presents the results of the human evaluation of insight quality for CaseGPT and the GPT-3 Zero-shot baseline.
Table 3: Human Evaluation of Generated Insights (5-point Likert scale)
System Quality Relevance Actionability
GPT-3 Zero-shot 3.6 3.4 3.5
CaseGPT 4.3 4.5 4.4
CaseGPT consistently outperforms the GPT-3 Zero-shot baseline across all three dimensions of insight evaluation. The
marked improvement in relevance (4.5 vs 3.4) highlights CaseGPT’s ability to generate insights that are closely aligned
with the specific context of each case. The higher actionability score (4.4 vs 3.5) indicates that CaseGPT’s insights are
more practical and applicable, a crucial factor in both medical and legal decision-making processes.
5 Discussion
Our experiments with CaseGPT show promising results in both medical and legal domains. The improvements in
precision, recall, and F1 scores are encouraging, suggesting that our approach may offer advantages over existing
methods. However, these findings should be interpreted with caution.
CaseGPT’s ability to handle complex professional terminologies was somewhat unexpected. This capability could
be particularly valuable in fields where precise language is crucial. However, we must remember that understanding
terminology is just one aspect of professional expertise.
The potential of CaseGPT as a decision support tool is intriguing. Its high precision and recall rates, along with
the generation of actionable insights, could aid in medical diagnoses and legal case preparations. Yet, it’s crucial to
emphasize that CaseGPT should complement, not replace, human judgment.
The efficiency gains, with response times of 0.5 seconds for medical and 0.8 seconds for legal queries, are noteworthy.
In time-sensitive scenarios, this speed could be invaluable. However, we need to consider whether such rapid responses
might sometimes come at the expense of nuanced analysis.
CaseGPT’s potential to democratize access to expert-level insights is an interesting prospect. It could benefit junior
professionals and resource-constrained environments. However, this raises questions about the role of experiential
learning in professional development.

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: System | P@10 | R@10 | F1 | MRR | NDCG@10 | Time (s)
Row 1: System: TF-IDF + BM25 | P@10: 0.72 | R@10: 0.7 | F1: 0.71 | MRR: 0.75 | NDCG@10: 0.74 | Time (s): 1.2
Row 2: System: BERT-based | P@10: 0.79 | R@10: 0.77 | F1: 0.78 | MRR: 0.82 | NDCG@10: 0.81 | Time (s): 1.0
Row 3: System: GPT-3 Zero-shot | P@10: 0.83 | R@10: 0.81 | F1: 0.82 | MRR: 0.86 | NDCG@10: 0.85 | Time (s): 1.3
Row 4: System: LEGAL-BERT | P@10: 0.87 | R@10: 0.85 | F1: 0.86 | MRR: 0.89 | NDCG@10: 0.88 | Time (s): 0.9
Row 5: System: CaseGPT | P@10: 0.93 | R@10: 0.9 | F1: 0.91 | MRR: 0.94 | NDCG@10: 0.93 | Time (s): 0.8
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
While our current experiments didn’t test CaseGPT’s ability to learn and adapt over time, this feature could be crucial
for maintaining relevance as professional knowledge evolves. Real-world implementation of this capability may present
unforeseen challenges.
In conclusion, CaseGPT shows potential to impact workflow processes and service quality in medical and legal fields.
However, further research is needed to understand its long-term effects and limitations in real-world applications. As
we move forward, it will be essential to balance optimism with rigorous testing and critical evaluation.
6 Ethical Considerations and Limitations
Despite its impressive performance, the deployment of CaseGPT in sensitive domains like healthcare and law necessitates careful consideration of ethical implications and potential limitations:
Privacy and Data Protection: The use of large datasets containing sensitive personal information raises important
privacy concerns. Robust anonymization techniques and strict data governance policies must be implemented to protect
individual privacy and comply with regulations like HIPAA in healthcare and client confidentiality rules in law.
Bias and Fairness: Like all AI systems, CaseGPT may inadvertently perpetuate or amplify biases present in its training
data. Regular audits for bias and the implementation of fairness-aware machine learning techniques are crucial to ensure
equitable outcomes across diverse populations.
Transparency and Explainability: The complex nature of CaseGPT’s underlying models may make it challenging to
provide clear explanations for its recommendations. Developing methods to enhance the explainability of the system’s
outputs is essential, particularly in domains where the reasoning behind decisions is often as important as the decisions
themselves.
Over-reliance and Deskilling: There is a risk that professionals may become over-reliant on CaseGPT, potentially
leading to a deskilling effect. It is crucial to emphasize that CaseGPT is designed as a decision support tool, not a
replacement for professional judgment and expertise.
Handling of Edge Cases: While CaseGPT demonstrates strong overall performance, its ability to handle rare or
unprecedented cases may be limited. Further research is needed to enhance the system’s robustness in dealing with
such edge cases.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
This study introduces CaseGPT, a novel framework for case-based reasoning that synergizes Large Language Models
(LLMs) with Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) technology. Our comprehensive experiments in medical and
legal domains demonstrate CaseGPT’s superior performance in case retrieval and insight generation, surpassing existing
state-of-the-art methods.
7.1 Key Contributions
The primary contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
Innovative Architecture CaseGPT seamlessly integrates semantic query understanding with precise case retrieval and
insightful recommendations, advancing the field of AI-assisted professional decision-making.
Cross-Domain Efficacy Empirical evidence shows significant improvements in retrieval accuracy and efficiency across
multiple professional domains, highlighting the framework’s versatility.
Expert-Validated Insights The system generates high-quality, relevant insights based on retrieved cases, as corroborated by domain experts, bridging the gap between data retrieval and actionable knowledge.
Ethical Considerations A nuanced discussion of the implications, limitations, and ethical considerations provides a
balanced view of deploying such systems in sensitive professional contexts.
7.2 Future Research Directions
While CaseGPT marks a significant advancement, several critical areas warrant further investigation:
1. Transfer Learning: Exploring techniques to adapt CaseGPT to new professional domains with minimal
retraining, enhancing its scalability and applicability.

[PAGE 10]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,
crucial for building trust and accountability in professional settings.
3. Robustness Enhancement: Investigating strategies to improve CaseGPT’s performance on rare or unprecedented
cases, ensuring reliability across diverse scenarios.
4. Longitudinal Impact Assessment: Conducting long-term studies to evaluate CaseGPT’s influence on professional decision-making processes and outcomes, providing insights into its real-world efficacy.
5. Privacy-Preserving Collaborative Learning: Integrating federated learning approaches to facilitate knowledge
sharing while maintaining data privacy, addressing a key concern in sensitive domains.
7.3 Concluding Remarks
CaseGPT represents a paradigm shift in AI-assisted case-based reasoning for professional domains. By amalgamating
advanced language understanding with robust retrieval and generation capabilities, it offers transformative potential in
how professionals access, analyze, and leverage case data.
As we advance this technology, our focus must extend beyond technical refinements to encompass responsible
development and thoughtful integration into professional practices. The true promise of CaseGPT lies in its capacity to
augment human expertise, fostering improved outcomes across the critical domains of healthcare and law.
Ultimately, the success of CaseGPT will be measured not just by its technical prowess, but by its ability to:
• Enhance decision-making processes in complex professional scenarios
• Democratize access to specialized knowledge and insights
• Uphold the highest standards of ethical practice and data privacy
As we look to the future, the continued development of CaseGPT must be guided by a commitment to these principles,
ensuring that this powerful tool serves to elevate and support human expertise in the most critical and sensitive domains
of professional practice.
References
[1] Allan Hanbury. Medical information retrieval: an instance of domain-specific search. In Proceedings of the 35th
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval , pages 1191–1192.
ACM, 2012.
[2] Tetiana Hovorushchenko, Yevhen Hnatchuk, and Oksana Savchuk. Concept of information-search system (on the
basis of ontologies) for the domain of medical law. Computer Science & Information Technologies, 2, 2020.
[3] Frank Schilder. Legal expertise meets artificial intelligence: A critical analysis of large language models as
intelligent assistance technology. DBLP, 2023.
[4] Hartini Saripan, Nurul Saadah Fathiah Muhammad Saleh Putera, Raihanah Abdullah Hassan, and Shafiza Mohd
Abdullah. Artificial intelligence and medical negligence in malaysia: Confronting the informed consent dilemma.
International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences , 11(11), 2021.
[5] R Srivel, Krishnamoorthy Kaliannan, S Shanthi, and Umasankar Perumal. An automation query expansion
strategy for information retrieval by using fuzzy based grasshopper optimization algorithm on medical datasets.
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience , 2022.
[6] Sonika Chawla. Application of fuzzy c-means clustering and semantic ontology in web query session mining for
intelligent information retrieval. International Journal of Fuzzy Systems and Advanced Applications , 8:1–8, 2021.
[7] Ruijie Zhang, Qingyao Ai, Yiqun Wu, Yu Ma, and Yiling Liu. Result diversification for legal case retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , pages
2349–2358, 2023.
[8] Bin Liu, Yiqun Wu, Yue Liu, Fangzhao Zhang, Yunqiu Shao, Chenliang Li, Min Zhang, and Shaoping Ma.
Conversational vs traditional: Comparing search behavior and outcome in legal case retrieval. In Proceedings of
the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages
2018–2022, 2021.
[9] Safia Frihat, Cristina Lampros Beckmann, Erik M Hartmann, and Norbert Fuhr. Document difficulty aspects
for medical practitioners: Enhancing information retrieval in personalized search engines. Applied Sciences,
13(19):10612, 2023.

[TABLE page=10 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: crucial for building trust and accountability in professional settings.
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: 3. Robustness Enhancement: Investigating strategies to improve CaseGPT’s performance on rare or unprecedented
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: cases, ensuring reliability across diverse scenarios.
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: 4. Longitudinal Impact Assessment: Conducting long-term studies to evaluate CaseGPT’s influence on profesRow 5: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: sional decision-making processes and outcomes, providing insights into its real-world efficacy.
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: 5. Privacy-Preserving Collaborative Learning: Integrating federated learning approaches to facilitate knowledge
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: sharing while maintaining data privacy, addressing a key concern in sensitive domains.
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: .3 | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Concluding Remarks
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: aseGPT represents a paradigm shift in AI-assisted case-based reasoning for professional domains. By amalgamating | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: dvanced language understanding with robust retrieval and generation capabilities, it offers transformative potential in | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: ow professionals access, analyze, and leverage case data. | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: s | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: we advance this technology, our focus must extend beyond technical refinements to encompass responsible
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: evelopment and thoughtful integration into professional practices. The true promise of CaseGPT lies in its capacity to | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: ugment human expertise, fostering improved outcomes across the critical domains of healthcare and law. | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: ltimately, the success of CaseGPT will be measured not just by its technical prowess, but by its ability to: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: • Enhance decision-making processes in complex professional scenarios
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: • Democratize access to specialized knowledge and insights
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: • Uphold the highest standards of ethical practice and data privacy
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: s we look to the future, the continued development of CaseGPT must be guided by a commitment to these principles, | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: nsuring that this powerful tool serves to elevate and support human expertise in the most critical and sensitive domains | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: f professional practice. | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: eferences | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,:
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: [1] | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Allan Hanbury. Medical information retrieval: an instance of domain-specific search. In Proceedings of the 35th
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, pages 1191–1192.
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: ACM, 2012.
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: [2] | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Tetiana Hovorushchenko, Yevhen Hnatchuk, and Oksana Savchuk. Concept of information-search system (on the
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: basis of ontologies) for the domain of medical law. Computer Science & Information Technologies, 2, 2020.
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: [3] | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Frank Schilder. Legal expertise meets artificial intelligence: A critical analysis of large language models as
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: intelligent assistance technology. DBLP, 2023.
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: [4] | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Hartini Saripan, Nurul Saadah Fathiah Muhammad Saleh Putera, Raihanah Abdullah Hassan, and Shafiza Mohd
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Abdullah. Artificial intelligence and medical negligence in malaysia: Confronting the informed consent dilemma.
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences, 11(11), 2021.
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: [5] | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: R Srivel, Krishnamoorthy Kaliannan, S Shanthi, and Umasankar Perumal. An automation query expansion
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: strategy for information retrieval by using fuzzy based grasshopper optimization algorithm on medical datasets.
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 2022.
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: [6] | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Sonika Chawla. Application of fuzzy c-means clustering and semantic ontology in web query session mining for
Row 37: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: intelligent information retrieval. International Journal of Fuzzy Systems and Advanced Applications, 8:1–8, 2021.
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: [7] | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Ruijie Zhang, Qingyao Ai, Yiqun Wu, Yu Ma, and Yiling Liu. Result diversification for legal case retrieval. In
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: 2349–2358, 2023.
Row 41: Unnamed: 0: [8] | 2. Explainable AI: Developing advanced methods to elucidate the reasoning behind CaseGPT’s recommendations,: Bin Liu, Yiqun Wu, Yue Liu, Fangzhao Zhang, Yunqiu Shao, Chenliang Li, Min Zhang, and Shaoping Ma.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 11]
CaseGPT: A Case Reasoning Framework
[10] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[11] Ilias Chalkidis, Manos Fergadiotis, Prodromos Malakasiotis, Nikolaos Aletras, and Ion Androutsopoulos. Legalbert: The muppets straight out of law school. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02559, 2020.
[12] Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So, and Jaewoo Kang.
Biobert: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics,
36(4):1234–1240, 2020.
[13] Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy . Now Publishers Inc, 2014.
[14] Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey on bias and
fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35, 2021.
[15] Christoph Molnar. Interpretable machine learning. Lulu. com, 2020.
[16] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages
5998–6008, 2017.
[17] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandara Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich
Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, and others. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledgeintensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9459–9474,
2020.
[18] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[19] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, 2019.
[20] Yu A Malkov and Dmitry A Yashunin. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using hierarchical
navigable small world graphs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 42(4):824–836,
2018.
[21] Chen Yang, Peilin Zhang, Ruihai Dong, and Jun Xu. Dynamic indexing and document length normalization in
information retrieval systems. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGIR International Conference on Theory of
Information Retrieval, pages 221–228, 2020.
[22] Daniel Cer, Mona Diab, Eneko Agirre, Inigo Lopez-Gazpio, and Lucia Specia. Semeval-2017 task 1: Semantic
textual similarity multilingual and crosslingual focused evaluation. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017), pages 1–14, 2017.
[23] Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with gpus. IEEE Transactions on
Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2019.
[24] Tie-Yan Liu. Learning to rank for information retrieval. F oundations and Trends in Information Retrieval ,
3(3):225–331, 2009.
[25] Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. The use of mmr, diversity-based reranking for reordering documents and
producing summaries. In Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pages 335–336, 1998.