[PAGE 1]
Wavelet GPT - Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
Prateek Verma1
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have ushered in
a new wave of artificial intelligence advancements
impacting every scientific field and discipline. We
live in a world where most of the data around
us, e.g., text, audio, and music, has a multi-scale
structure. This paper infuses LLMs with a traditional signal processing idea, namely wavelets,
during pre-training to take advantage of the structure. Without adding any extra parameters to a
GPT-style LLM architecture in an academic setup,
we achieve the same pre-training performance almost twice as fast in text, audio, and images. This
is done by imposing a structure on intermediate
embeddings. When trained for the same number
of training steps, we achieve significant gains in
performance, which is comparable to pre-training
a larger neural architecture. Further, we show this
extends to the Long Range Arena benchmark and
several input representations such as characters,
BPE tokens, bytes, waveform, math expression,
and image pixels. Our architecture allows every
next token prediction access to intermediate embeddings at different temporal resolutions in every
decoder block. We hope this will pave the way
for incorporating multi-rate signal processing into
pre-training instead of going after scale.
1. Introduction and Related Work
LLMs have ushered in a super-renaissance of AI advancements and are touching every scientific and engineering
discipline. At the heart of this is the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), initially proposed for machine
translation. Transformer architecture became the backbone
of GPT (Generative Pretrained Transformer) language models (Brown et, 2020) first proposed by Open-AI. Modern
LLMs are trained on a straightforward objective: To pre1Department of Computer Science, Stanford Natural Language
Processing Group, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. This
work was done while Prateek Verma was with the Stanford Natural
Processing Group in 2023. Correspondence to: Prateek Verma
<prateekv@stanford.edu>.
dict the next token given the previous context, preserving
the causality. This not only works for language but also for
robotics (Brohan et al., 2023b;a), protein sequences (Madani
et al., 2020), raw audio waveforms(Verma & Chafe, 2021),
acoustic/music tokens (Huang et al., 2019; Verma & Smith,
2020; Borsos et al., 2023), videos (Yan et al., 2021) etc. This
simple recipe of tokenization/creating an embedding and
feeding it to transformers also has given rise to non-causal
architectures such as BERT(Devlin et al., 2019), Vision
Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), Audio Transformers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva
et al., 2023). With increased performance by scale, LLMs
are reaching hundreds of billions to trillions of parameters
(Brown et, 2020; Fedus et al., 2022).
Recent concerns suggest AI research is shifting from
academia to industry, according to a Washington Post article
by (Nix, 2024). This work aims to enhance LLM capabilities to match those of larger architectures or achieve
equivalent performance in fewer training steps. Knowledge
distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), uses a larger model to
guide a smaller one. (Gu et al., 2024) used KL divergence
to enhance next-token prediction from teacher model feedback model rather than training the smaller one from scratch.
Model pruning (Sun et al., 2024) removes weights to match
the same performance as a large model like LLAMA (Touvron et al., 2023), with fewer compute flops during inference, still relying on a larger model. (Dettmers et al., 2024)
focus on improving inference or fine-tuning existing models. Unlike distillation and pruning our approach focuses
on improving performance during pre-training from scratch.
(Nawrot et al., 2022), proposed hierarchical transformers
using upsampling-downsampling operations achieve results
comparable to those of Transformers but with more efficient
computation. Clockwork RNN (Koutnik et al., 2014) improves long-context modelling by splitting RNN neurons
into modules that update at different clock rates. Only a few
modules activate at each time step. Our approach modifies
intermediate embeddings with simple tweaks without using
separate learning modules or varying update rates.
Tinkering with the intermediate embeddings: (Tamkin et.
al, 2020) proposed hand-tuned filters on the Discrete Cosine Transform- DCT (Ahmed et al., 1974) of the latent
space for different NLP tasks for non-causal BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019). Computing DCT over context length makes
arXiv:2409.12924v4 [eess.SP] 9 Feb 2025

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva
Row 1: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: GPT-style LLM architecture in an academic setup, | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: et al., 2023). With increased performance by scale, LLMs
Row 2: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: we achieve the same pre-training performance al- | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: are reaching hundreds of billions to trillions of parameters
Row 3: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: most twice as fast in text, audio, and images. This | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: (Brown et, 2020; Fedus et al., 2022).
Row 4: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: is done by imposing a structure on intermediate | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva:
Row 5: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: embeddings. When trained for the same number | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: Recent concerns suggest AI research is shifting from
Row 6: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: of training steps, we achieve significant gains in | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: academia to industry, according to a Washington Post article
Row 7: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: performance, which is comparable to pre-training | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: by (Nix, 2024). This work aims to enhance LLM capaRow 8: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: a larger neural architecture. Further, we show this | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: bilities to match those of larger architectures or achieve
Row 9: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: extends to the Long Range Arena benchmark and | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: equivalent performance in fewer training steps. Knowledge
Row 10: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: several input representations such as characters, | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), uses a larger model to
Row 11: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: BPE tokens, bytes, waveform, math expression, | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: guide a smaller one. (Gu et al., 2024) used KL divergence
Row 12: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: and image pixels. Our architecture allows every | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: to enhance next-token prediction from teacher model feedRow 13: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: next token prediction access to intermediate em- | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: back model rather than training the smaller one from scratch.
Row 14: ture. Without adding any extra parameters to a: beddings at different temporal resolutions in every | ers (Verma & Berger, 2021) and Video Transformers (Selva: Model pruning (Sun et al., 2024) removes weights to match
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
it not applicable for causal applications such as language
modelling. There has been work on applying ideas from
signal processing-like methods to BERT-like non-causal architectures. We discuss two here, FNet and WavSPA. They
focus on improving attention block, which differs from our
work on GPT, which retains a vanilla attention layer. FNet
proposed by (Lee-Thorp et al., 2022) removes the costly
attention mechanism, replacing it with a 2-D FFT block.
This operation is non-causal as it looks into future tokens
for computing 2-D FFT. WavSpA (Zhuang et al., 2024) carries attention mechanism in the wavelet space. The input
sequences are transformed into wavelet space, and the attention mechanism is carried out and then reconstructed.
However, computing wavelet transform is non-causal, making them non-applicable for GPT-based LLMs as they look
at the entire sequence length (Fig 1 (Zhuang et al., 2024)).
Our work is inspired by neuroscience, which provides evidence that human brain learns multi-scale representations
for language at multiple time scales (Caucheteux et al.,
2023) instead of fixed-resolution representations. We impose multi-scale representation onto every intermediate decoder embedding at different dimensions. To the best of our
knowledge, the paper’s contributions are: 1) We propose
the first instance of incorporating wavelets into LLM pretraining. We add multi-scale filters onto each of the intermediate embeddings of decoder layers using the Haar/learnable
wavelet pipeline. This allows every next token prediction
access to multi-scale intermediate embeddings instead of being fixed-resolution in every decoder layer representation. 2)
We show speedups in pre-training of GPT, like transformerbased LLM in the range of 40-60%, with adding a multiscale structure. With same training steps, the model gives a
performance boost akin to adding several layers.
2. Dataset
We use four open-source datasets from four domains for next
token prediction: natural language, symbolic music, speech
tokens, and raw audio waveform. For text, we choose text-8
(Mikolov et al., 2012). We choose this over other datasets
as i)it is a famous and widely cited character-level language
modelling dataset, and ii) it uses a simple vocabulary (space
+ 26 lowercase characters) to detach the effects of various
tokenizers. It has 100M characters with split training split
as given by (Al-Rfou et al., 2019). For raw audio, the
goal is to predict the next sample given the context. We
use the YouTube-Mix-8 dataset for long-context modeling
(Goel et al., 2022; Verma, 2022). Our vocabulary size is
256, with a sampling rate 16KHz as input is 8-bit. We
use a third dataset, MAESTRO (Hawthorne et al., 2019),
containing over 1000 MIDI files of classical music pieces
with a tokenizer proposed by (Huang et al., 2019), which
converts MIDI tracks into discrete tokens with a vocabulary
size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech
dataset and a widely used ENCODEC (D´efossez et al., 2022)
tokenizer in a setup similar to V ALL-E (Wang et al., 2023)
to model acoustic tokens 1. The goal in all four modalities
is not to chase state-of-the-art pre-training performance, as
this paper was written in an academic setting with very few
computational resources. We show how the model performs
in pre-training instead of post-training, as the goal is to build
better foundational architectures with the same parameters,
pushing the capabilities of smaller decoder architectures.
Figure 1. Manipulating signals between GPT decoder blocks by
computing 1-D causal discrete haar wavelet transform/learnable
approximation at different levels capturing multi-scale structure
for each signal. (Right) From (Gao & Yan, 2006) explaining
non-stationary signal processing for signals. Leftmost route of
approximate coefficients to model coarsest to finest scales.
3. Methodology
This section will describe the approach to incorporating
wavelet inspired computation into transformer-based Large
Language Models while retaining causality. The ideas
described here are generic as we tinker intermediate embeddings. Thus theycan be easily extrapolated to nonTransformer architectures, e.g. state space model. For any
GPT signal, we compute a version of the discrete wavelet
transform and incorporate it back into the signal. Let xl
(i) be
the output of the lth decoder layer, representing the activation along the ith coordinate, with a dimension equal to the
context length L of the transformer-based GPT model. In
the original GPT architecture with N + 1 layers and embedding dimension E, we obtain N · E signals of length L from
intermediate embeddings between decoder blocks, where
E ranges from [0 − 128) dimensions. For any signal x[n],
the discrete wavelet transform resembles passing the signal
through filters of varying resolutions, as illustrated in Figure
2. We will use the Haar wavelet, a family of square-shaped
functions this paper obtained from a mother wavelet via
1The goal in this work, is how well we can model the coarsest
tokens, as errors in modelling the coarser tokens will lead to the
finer tokens being modelled incorrectly as they are conditioned on
the coarsest token, thus affecting model performance

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: it not applicable for causal applications such as language | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech
Row 1: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: modelling. There has been work on applying ideas from | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: dataset and a widely used ENCODEC (Défossez et al., 2022)
Row 2: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: signal processing-like methods to BERT-like non-causal ar- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: tokenizer in a setup similar to VALL-E (Wang et al., 2023)
Row 3: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: chitectures. We discuss two here, FNet and WavSPA. They | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: to model acoustic tokens 1. The goal in all four modalities
Row 4: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: focus on improving attention block, which differs from our | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: is not to chase state-of-the-art pre-training performance, as
Row 5: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: work on GPT, which retains a vanilla attention layer. FNet | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: this paper was written in an academic setting with very few
Row 6: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: proposed by (Lee-Thorp et al., 2022) removes the costly | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: computational resources. We show how the model performs
Row 7: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: attention mechanism, replacing it with a 2-D FFT block. | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: in pre-training instead of post-training, as the goal is to build
Row 8: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: This operation is non-causal as it looks into future tokens | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: better foundational architectures with the same parameters,
Row 9: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: for computing 2-D FFT. WavSpA (Zhuang et al., 2024) car- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: pushing the capabilities of smaller decoder architectures.
Row 10: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: ries attention mechanism in the wavelet space. The input | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 11: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: sequences are transformed into wavelet space, and the at- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 12: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: tention mechanism is carried out and then reconstructed. | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 13: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: However, computing wavelet transform is non-causal, mak- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 14: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: ing them non-applicable for GPT-based LLMs as they look | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 15: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: at the entire sequence length (Fig 1 (Zhuang et al., 2024)). | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 16: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: Our work is inspired by neuroscience, which provides evi- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 17: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: dence that human brain learns multi-scale representations | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 18: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: for language at multiple time scales (Caucheteux et al., | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 19: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: 2023) instead of fixed-resolution representations. We im- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 20: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: pose multi-scale representation onto every intermediate de- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 21: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: coder embedding at different dimensions. To the best of our | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: Figure 1. Manipulating signals between GPT decoder blocks by
Row 22: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: knowledge, the paper’s contributions are: 1) We propose | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: computing 1-D causal discrete haar wavelet transform/learnable
Row 23: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: the first instance of incorporating wavelets into LLM pre- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: approximation at different levels capturing multi-scale structure
Row 24: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: training. We add multi-scale filters onto each of the interme- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: for each signal. (Right) From (Gao & Yan, 2006) explaining
Row 25: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: diate embeddings of decoder layers using the Haar/learnable | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: non-stationary signal processing for signals. Leftmost route of
Row 26: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: approximate coefficients to model coarsest to finest scales.
Row 27: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: wavelet pipeline. This allows every next token prediction | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 28: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: access to multi-scale intermediate embeddings instead of be- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 29: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: ing fixed-resolution in every decoder layer representation. 2) | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 30: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: We show speedups in pre-training of GPT, like transformer- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: 3. Methodology
Row 31: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: based LLM in the range of 40-60%, with adding a multi- | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 32: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: This section will describe the approach to incorporating
Row 33: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: scale structure. With same training steps, the model gives a | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 34: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: wavelet inspired computation into transformer-based Large
Row 35: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: performance boost akin to adding several layers. | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 36: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: Language Models while retaining causality. The ideas
Row 37: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: described here are generic as we tinker intermediate emRow 38: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: 2. Dataset | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: beddings. Thus theycan be easily extrapolated to nonRow 39: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: Transformer architectures, e.g. state space model. For any
Row 40: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: We use four open-source datasets from four domains for next | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 41: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: GPT signal, we compute a version of the discrete wavelet
Row 42: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: token prediction: natural language, symbolic music, speech | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech:
Row 43: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: transform and incorporate it back into the signal. Let xl be
Row 44: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: tokens, and raw audio waveform. For text, we choose text-8 | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: (i)
Row 45: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: th
Row 46: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: (Mikolov et al., 2012). We choose this over other datasets | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: the output of the l decoder layer, representing the activaRow 47: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: th
Row 48: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: as i)it is a famous and widely cited character-level language | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: tion along the i coordinate, with a dimension equal to the
Row 49: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: modelling dataset, and ii) it uses a simple vocabulary (space | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: context length L of the transformer-based GPT model. In
Row 50: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: + 26 lowercase characters) to detach the effects of various | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: the original GPT architecture with N +1 layers and embedRow 51: it not applicable for causal applications such as language: tokenizers. It has 100M characters with split training split | size of 388. Finally, we use 1000 hours of LibriSpeech: ding dimension E, we obtainN ·E signals of length L from
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
Figure 2. (Bottom L): A 3-level filter bank tree generates signals
at different resolutions. Approximate coefficients are computed
by applying a wavelet’s impulse response & recursively downsampling. (Top L): Approximate and detailed coefficients are
iteratively calculated via first-order averages/differences and downsampling until a single scalar represents the signal. (R): For a
32-length signal, Haar wavelet captures coarsest to finest approximations and is redrawn from (Flores-Mangas, 2014). Embeddings
evolve at different rates via causal wavelet approximation, with
coarse (level 5) and fine (level 2) resolutions, embedding multiscale information into decoder layers for every token.
scaling and shifting operations. Given a mother wavelet
function ψ, the child wavelets as ψj,k[n], where j is the
scaling factor and k is the shift factor.
ψj,k[n] = 1√
2j
ψ
 n − k2j
2j

(1)
These signals are shifted and scaled to capture information
at various time scales, with n representing time or the context length. This concept resembles the diagram in Figure 1,
which illustrates capturing different signals in the intermediate layers of Transformer decoders at various resolutions.
Discrete wavelet transform, which passes any signal through
filters and downsampling operations. This process, shown
in Figure 2, is similar to a convolutional neural network
(CNN) like ResNet (He et. al, 2016), featuring learned
convolutional filters analogous to h[n] and g[n], along with
downsampling, such as max pooling. In convolutional architectures, we follow one branch of Figure 2, recursively
taking the output of filters and downsampling. This similarity contributed to popularity of wavelets in the 1990/2000s
for image understanding, reflecting parallels with convolutional architectures (Huang & Aviyente, 2008; Kingsbury
& Magarey, 1998). For Haar wavelets, this is passing the
signal through low-pass and high-pass filters corresponding
to the kernels g[n] and h[n]. The Haar wavelet transform
averages and computes differences, with impulse responses
g[n] =
 1
2 , 1

and h[n] =
 1
2 , − 1

. Figure 2 provides a
detailed explanation of the discrete wavelet transform. For
a 1-D signal x[n] of length L, we get level 1 coefficients by
filters g[n] and h[n], followed by downsampling. Thus, the
approximation coefficients yapprox and ydetail result from a
LTI system defined by convolution followed by downsampling by two (Equation 2). This is seen in Algorithm 1 with
type ∈ {approx, detail} and fapprox = g, fdetail = h.
ytype[n] =
∞X
k=−∞
x[k] ftype[2n − k] (2)
To obtain multi-scale representations of the original signal,
the operation for x[n] is recursively applied to ya (approx)
to derive level 2 wavelet coefficients y2
a and y2
d (detail).
Here, x[n] represents intermediate signals across the context length at each decoder block output in the LLM. The
approximate coefficients ya and yd, along with their decompositions {ya, yd, y2
a, y3
a, y4
a, . . .}, are used for further
processing. Notably, y2
a, y3
a, y4
a have lengths reduced by
factors of 2, 4, 8, . . .. The Haar wavelet transform averages
adjacent samples while preserving causality by averaging
current and past samples. Higher-order coefficients capture
averages over larger context lengths, as shown in Figure 2.
We can continue until only a single scalar value remains,
representing the mean of the signal. The Haar wavelet
transform computes averages and differences to create a
multi-resolution representation, capturing low and high frequencies at different resolutions. Figure 2 illustrates the
same signal captured at coarser and finer representations
using Haar wavelets, applied to intermediate embeddings,
allowing each next token prediction access to these representations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create
a multi-resolution representation by varying the kernel size
(Algorithm 1) to allow the LLM to learn the optimal kernels
optimized for the next token prediction.
3.1. Connecting wavelets and LLM embeddings
In many signal processing applications, first order detailed
along with approximate coefficients captures signals at various levels. We do the same with signals from intermediate
transformer embeddings across tokens. Our premise is that
real-world data is structured: text ranges from letters to
words, sentences, and topics, symbolic music ranges from
notes, motifs and pieces with speech from phonemes, morphemes to syllables to phrases. With Haar wavelet, this can
be approximated as a simple averaging operation. For the
learnable version, the weights of the kernel for the multiscale version are optimized to predict the next token. Continuing with the approximate coefficients will eventually yield
a single scalar, the average of the entire signal in the case
of the Haar wavelet. Several methods can be employed to
match the original signal’s sequence length from the approximation coefficients, including up-sampling. We refer to the
signal approximated at a specific level with the same length
as the ”approximate signal” distinguishing it from shorter
approximate coefficients. In Figure 2 (R), to obtain the signal approximation at various levels matching the original

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: 1 | n− k2j | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create
Row 1: 1: ψj,k[n] = √ ψ | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: (1) | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create:
Row 2: 1: 2j | n− k2j: 2j | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: a multi-resolution representation by varying the kernel size
Row 3: 1: | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: (Algorithm 1) to allow the LLM to learn the optimal kernels
Row 4: 1: These signals are shifted and scaled to capture information | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create:
Row 5: 1: | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: optimized for the next token prediction.
Row 6: 1: at various time scales, with n representing time or the con- | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create:
Row 7: 1: text length. This concept resembles the diagram in Figure 1, | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create:
Row 8: 1: | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: 3.1. Connecting wavelets and LLM embeddings
Row 9: 1: which illustrates capturing different signals in the interme- | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create:
Row 10: 1: diate layers of Transformer decoders at various resolutions. | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: In many signal processing applications, first order detailed
Row 11: 1: Discrete wavelet transform, which passes any signal through | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: along with approximate coefficients captures signals at variRow 12: 1: filters and downsampling operations. This process, shown | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: ous levels. We do the same with signals from intermediate
Row 13: 1: in Figure 2, is similar to a convolutional neural network | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: transformer embeddings across tokens. Our premise is that
Row 14: 1: (CNN) like ResNet (He et. al, 2016), | n− k2j: featuring | Unnamed: 0: learned | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: real-world data is structured: text ranges from letters to
Row 15: 1: convolutional filters analogous to h[n] and g[n], along with | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: words, sentences, and topics, symbolic music ranges from
Row 16: 1: downsampling, such as max pooling. | n− k2j: In convolutional ar- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: notes, motifs and pieces with speech from phonemes, morRow 17: 1: chitectures, we follow one branch of Figure 2, recursively | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: phemes to syllables to phrases. With Haar wavelet, this can
Row 18: 1: taking the output of filters and downsampling. This similar- | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: be approximated as a simple averaging operation. For the
Row 19: 1: ity contributed to popularity of wavelets in the 1990/2000s | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: learnable version, the weights of the kernel for the multiRow 20: 1: for image understanding, reflecting parallels with convolu- | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: scale version are optimized to predict the next token. ContinRow 21: 1: tional architectures (Huang & Aviyente, 2008; Kingsbury | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: uing with the approximate coefficients will eventually yield
Row 22: 1: & Magarey, 1998). For Haar wavelets, this is passing the | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: a single scalar, the average of the entire signal in the case
Row 23: 1: signal through low-pass and high-pass filters corresponding | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: of the Haar wavelet. Several methods can be employed to
Row 24: 1: to the kernels g[n] and h[n]. The Haar wavelet transform | n− k2j: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | tations. For the case of learnable wavelet kernels, we create: match the original signal’s sequence length from the approx-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
input signal x[n], we apply the wavelet kernel by multiplying the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that
level (e.g., [1, 1], [1, 1, 1, 1], etc.). This piecewise constant
function is shown in Figure 2. LLM embedding coordinates
define unique resolution kernels, each corresponding to a
specific scale of data. The reconstructed signal xrecon[n],
a method to derive the *approximate signal*, is computed
from wavelet coefficients cj at level j as:
xj
recon[n] =
X
k
ck · ψj,k[n] (3)
Equation 3 requires storing child wavelets at various approximations, complicating the process and rendering it
non-causal as computing ck considers the entire signal.
Due to the dependence of ck on future information, we
cannot use this to reconstruct the signal from its approximate coefficients. To adapt this for LLM, we simplify
the computation of the *approximate signal* in a differentiable manner using a variant from Equation 3 in both multiresolution learnable/non-learnable kernel settings. For the
Haar wavelet, we compute an average of the input signal
with varying kernel lengths, increasing the length until it approximates the entire signal. The kernel length determines
the level of signal approximation. LLMs operate under a
causality assumption, modifying the signal at a location
using prior samples within the kernel length. We zero-pad
the signal to the left when the window length is shorter
than the kernel. Wavelet transform at different levels gives
several versions of the signal at different resolutions, which
can mess up the structure of the intermediate embeddings.
To address this, we create different resolutions for signal
approximations parameterized by embedding dimension.
In Section 4.4, we make these kernels learnable, allowing
the architecture to maintain multi-scale operation (Equation
3), with learnable weights with xrecon[n] now being learned
with resolution parameterized by latent dimension.
3.2. Wavelet Coefficients by Embedding Coordinates
One option is to compute the approximate signals for each
coordinate signal xl
(i) across all decoder layers at levels I
to IX. For a context length of 512, this would require nine
additional signals with resolutions of 512, 256, 128, 64,
32, 16, 8, 4, and 2, significantly increasing complexity and
necessitating major modifications to our GPT model. We
propose a novel solution to address this. Instead of computing all levels of approximate signals for every intermediate
embedding dimension, we parameterize the level by the embedding dimension index. We want to steer the embeddings
only a little into the inductive biases we impose to avoid too
much tinkering with what they learn. Transformers have
been wildly successful without incorporating any inductive
biases. Ideally, we want the best of both worlds, nudging
intermediate GPT embeddings in only half of the dimensions. We adjust intermediate GPT embeddings in only half
the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates
0 to 64 when E = 128 ) remain unchanged. For the rest,
we apply processing based on their index i. If xl(i) is an
intermediate embedding after the lth decoder layer along
the ith dimension, the modified signal xnl(i) equals xl
(i)
for i ∈ [0, E/2]. For i > E/ 2, we impose structure using
an approximate signal calculated from wavelet coefficients
corresponding to the index i. We use a mapping function f
that takes coordinate i (ranging from E/2 to E) and returns
the kernel size corresponding to approximation levels from
I to IX . The linear function gradually increases from level
I (kernel size two at i = E/2) to level IX (kernel size 512
at i = E, or the coarsest representation i.e., a scalar).
Now, let us find out how we compute the modified new signal xnl
(i) that replaces the original intermediate Transformer
embeddings xl
(i). f (i) is the kernel size for the coordinate i.
The modified signal is either kept the same or modified as
xnl
(i)(k) = 1
f (i)
Pk
m=k−f (i) xl
(i)(m) as seen in Algorithm
1. For cases where k − f (i) < 0, we zero-pad the signal
to ensure valid average/kernel computation. Specifically,
for the Haar wavelet, the modified signal acts as a causal
moving average filter with finite length, averaging the embedding signal along the ith coordinate with a kernel size
determined by f (i). This operation does not introduce new
parameters or maintain causality in LLMs to prevent future
token leakage, as seen in Equation 4. In Algorithm 1, each
value of the modified signal at token k is computed using a
convolution with a learned kernel h(.) and variable length
f (i), parameterized by the embedding coordinate dimension
i. Each kernel is learned independently for every signal.
3.3. Imposing Structure: Toy Example
In Figure 3, we illustrate a toy example of how we impose
structure onto decoder Transformer embeddings. The left
side shows eight variations along the token dimension, with

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: than the kernel. Wavelet transform at different levels gives | convolution with a learned kernel h(.) and variable length
Row 1: than the kernel. Wavelet transform at different levels gives: several versions of the signal at different resolutions, which | convolution with a learned kernel h(.) and variable length: f(i), parameterized by the embedding coordinate dimension
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=4 index=2]
Columns: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates
Row 1: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: level (e.g., [1, 1], [1, 1, 1, 1], etc.). This piecewise constant | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: 0 to 64 when E = 128) remain unchanged. For the rest,
Row 2: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: function is shown in Figure 2. LLM embedding coordinates | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: we apply processing based on their index i. If xl(i) is an
Row 3: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: define unique resolution kernels, each corresponding to a | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: intermediate embedding after the lth decoder layer along
Row 4: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: specific scale of data. The reconstructed signal xrecon[n], | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: the ith dimension, the modified signal xnl(i) equals xl
Row 5: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: (i)
Row 6: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: a method to derive the *approximate signal*, is computed | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates:
Row 7: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: for i ∈ [0, E/2]. For i > E/2, we impose structure using
Row 8: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: from wavelet coefficients cj at level j as: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: an approximate signal calculated from wavelet coefficients
Row 9: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: corresponding to the index i. We use a mapping function f
Row 10: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: ∑ | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates:
Row 11: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: j | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: that takes coordinate i (ranging from E/2 to E) and returns
Row 12: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: xrecon[n] = ck · ψj,k[n] (3) | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: the kernel size corresponding to approximation levels from
Row 13: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: k | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates:
Row 14: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: I to IX . The linear function gradually increases from level
Row 15: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: I (kernel size two at i = E/2) to level IX (kernel size 512
Row 16: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: Equation 3 requires storing child wavelets at various ap- | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: at i = E, or the coarsest representation i.e., a scalar).
Row 17: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: proximations, complicating the process and rendering it | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates:
Row 18: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: non-causal as computing ck considers the entire signal. | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: Now, let us find out how we compute the modified new sigRow 19: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: Due to the dependence of c k on future information, we | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: nal xnl (i)that replaces the original intermediate Transformer
Row 20: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: cannot use this to reconstruct the signal from its approx- | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: embeddings xl . f(i) is the kernel size for the coordinate i.
Row 21: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: (i)
Row 22: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: imate coefficients. To adapt this for LLM, we simplify | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: The modified signal is either kept the same or modified as
Row 23: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: ∑
Row 24: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: the computation of the *approximate signal* in a differen- | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: xnl (k) = 1 kxl (m) as seen in Algorithm
Row 25: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: (i) f(i) m=k−f(i) (i)
Row 26: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: tiable manner using a variant from Equation 3 in both multi- | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: 1. For cases where k − f(i) < 0, we zero-pad the signal
Row 27: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: resolution learnable/non-learnable kernel settings. For the | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: to ensure valid average/kernel computation. Specifically,
Row 28: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: Haar wavelet, we compute an average of the input signal | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: for the Haar wavelet, the modified signal acts as a causal
Row 29: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: with varying kernel lengths, increasing the length until it ap- | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: moving average filter with finite length, averaging the emRow 30: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: proximates the entire signal. The kernel length determines | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: bedding signal along the ith coordinate with a kernel size
Row 31: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: the level of signal approximation. LLMs operate under a | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: determined by f(i). This operation does not introduce new
Row 32: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: causality assumption, modifying the signal at a location | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: parameters or maintain causality in LLMs to prevent future
Row 33: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: using prior samples within the kernel length. We zero-pad | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: token leakage, as seen in Equation 4. In Algorithm 1, each
Row 34: ing the approximate coefficients with the kernel for that: the signal to the left when the window length is shorter | the dimensions. Embeddings from 0 to E/2 (coordinates: value of the modified signal at token k is computed using a
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
Figure 3. (Left) Toy example showing embeddings before/after imposing multi-rate structure. Different embedding dimensions advance
at distinct rates while maintaining causality, as seen from patterns dispersing from dimension 64 to 0. (Right) Validation loss during
pre-training on text-8 with learnable multi-scale structure achieving comparable performance nearly twice as fast/performance boost akin
to adding additional decoder layers. Our architecture’s performance on text-8 with a 32-dim model matches the speedup similar to that
seen for 128-dim and shallower models. LRA image benchmark, a 10% performance increase without adding any parameters
onset/sudden bursts at token indices 32, 64, etc., decreasing
to zero before rising again. As discussed in the introduction,
datasets inherently possess a hierarchical structure, which
we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embeddings at each layer. In this example, we retain embeddings
at the original resolution for half the dimensions (split by
a white line). For the other half, we gradually increase the
kernel length across the context and compute the average
causally. The final embedding dimension averages over
the token dimension with a kernel size equal to the context
length (zero-padding if necessary). This creates highways,
allowing embeddings to move at different rates: the coordinates from E/2 to E move at the Transformer’s original
speed, while those from 0 to E/2 transition from faster
to slower movement. This approach enables the attention
mechanism to utilize multi-scale features at varying rates
across all layers and tokens, as explored in the next section.
Further, this multi-scale structure can be made learnable,
driven by just the next token prediction.
4. Experiments
The main aim of these experiments is to show that the pretraining performance of the models across four modalities
improves with/without doing intermediate modifications on
embeddings inspired by wavelets. We also benchmark on
LRA tasks. We propose a shrunk-down GPT baseline architecture that has the same topology. We do not compare
against larger architectures, as this paper focuses on pretraining from scratch, and was written in with access to
limited computational resources in academia. We evaluate
pre-training performance with and without wavelet-inspired
blocks. We only report how well our generative model
does for pretraining by quantifying the likelihood scores
similar to papers such as Mega-Byte (Yu et al., 2023) and
Music Transformer (Huang et al., 2019) that only report
NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method
across various modalities such as text, audio and music. Further, we benchmark it on various input representations such
as raw waveform, MIDI tokens, acoustic tokens, text bytes,
characters, and BPE tokens, in addition to math expressions. Our experiments, based on the GPT-2 architecture,
have 10 Transformer decoder layers with a context length
of 512, trained from scratch. Each modality shares the same
architecture, using an embedding dimension of 128, a feedforward dimension of 512, and 8 attention heads. The final
decoder outputs a dense layer of 2048 neurons, followed
by a layer matching the vocabulary size 2. Baseline models consist of standard Transformer decoder blocks without
modified embeddings. We retain half 3 of the embedding
coordinates for our proposed architecture and impose either
a fixed or learnable multi-scale structure on the other half for
all intermediate layers. All models were trained from scratch
in TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) for 25 epochs, starting
with a learning rate of 3e-4, decreasing to 1e-5 when loss
plateaued. Each model utilized 1M training points, totalling
500 million tokens, randomly cropped from the dataset.
We measured performance using negative log-likelihood
loss, as this method improves the core architecture of the
2V ocab of 27 for text8, 256 for raw waveform (Goel et al., 2022;
Verma, 2022), 388 for symbolic music, and 1024 for ENCODEC
speech tokens, 256 for 8-bit raw pixels, 50257 for BPE tokens
3The choice of half is a hyper-parameter and it is difficult
to optimize for every modality and input represenation due to
computational resource constraints. If the optimal split is not half,
it will only improve the already strong results

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed- | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method
Row 1: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: dings at each layer. In this example, we retain embeddings | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: across various modalities such as text, audio and music. FurRow 2: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: at the original resolution for half the dimensions (split by | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: ther, we benchmark it on various input representations such
Row 3: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: a white line). For the other half, we gradually increase the | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: as raw waveform, MIDI tokens, acoustic tokens, text bytes,
Row 4: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: kernel length across the context and compute the average | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: characters, and BPE tokens, in addition to math expresRow 5: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: causally. The final embedding dimension averages over | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: sions. Our experiments, based on the GPT-2 architecture,
Row 6: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: the token dimension with a kernel size equal to the context | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: have 10 Transformer decoder layers with a context length
Row 7: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: length (zero-padding if necessary). This creates highways, | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: of 512, trained from scratch. Each modality shares the same
Row 8: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: allowing embeddings to move at different rates: the coor- | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: architecture, using an embedding dimension of 128, a feedRow 9: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: dinates from E/2 to E move at the Transformer’s original | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: forward dimension of 512, and 8 attention heads. The final
Row 10: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: speed, while those from 0 to E/2 transition from faster | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: decoder outputs a dense layer of 2048 neurons, followed
Row 11: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: to slower movement. This approach enables the attention | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: by a layer matching the vocabulary size 2. Baseline modRow 12: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: mechanism to utilize multi-scale features at varying rates | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: els consist of standard Transformer decoder blocks without
Row 13: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: across all layers and tokens, as explored in the next section. | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: modified embeddings. We retain half 3 of the embedding
Row 14: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: Further, this multi-scale structure can be made learnable, | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: coordinates for our proposed architecture and impose either
Row 15: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: driven by just the next token prediction. | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: a fixed or learnable multi-scale structure on the other half for
Row 16: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: all intermediate layers. All models were trained from scratch
Row 17: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: 4. Experiments | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: in TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) for 25 epochs, starting
Row 18: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: with a learning rate of 3e-4, decreasing to 1e-5 when loss
Row 19: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: The main aim of these experiments is to show that the pre- | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: plateaued. Each model utilized 1M training points, totalling
Row 20: we capture by imposing intermediate Transformer embed-: training performance of the models across four modalities | NLL scores in the entire paper. We also validate our method: 500 million tokens, randomly cropped from the dataset.
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=5 index=2]
Columns: onset/sudden bursts at token indices 32, 64, etc., decreasing | does for pretraining by quantifying the likelihood scores
Row 1: onset/sudden bursts at token indices 32, 64, etc., decreasing: to zero before rising again. As discussed in the introduction, | does for pretraining by quantifying the likelihood scores: similar to papers such as Mega-Byte (Yu et al., 2023) and
Row 2: onset/sudden bursts at token indices 32, 64, etc., decreasing: datasets inherently possess a hierarchical structure, which | does for pretraining by quantifying the likelihood scores: Music Transformer (Huang et al., 2019) that only report
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
Figure 4. Results for natural language, symbolic music, and raw audio. We perform faster than baseline, almost twice as fast on shrunkdown GPT. We see substantial gains in pre-training performance for the same epochs, equivalent to a much larger architecture. The black
vertical line denotes the epoch at which our architecture achieves the same performance as our baseline architecture.
transformer-based GPT - helping achieve the objective we
want to achieve: predict the next token correctly. Since we
are operating on intermediate embeddings, our work can
hopefully generalize to setups with structured data similar to
text, raw audio, and symbolic music, where one can go from
a fine-grained structure to a coarse structure. We impose a
multi-scale structure that allows the attention mechanism to
learn dependencies across embeddings and inject some information that can capture coarse and fine-grained structures
into embedding coordinates while maintaining causality.
4.1. Performance on modalities
We compared the performance of our baseline architecture
across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio
waveform with and without wavelet-based intermediate operations. Results showed significant performance improvements in all modalities with the same number of training
steps. To illustrate, a 0.04 decrease in validation loss is
comparable to going from a 16 to a 64-layer model on text-8
dataset (papers-with code, 2024). As shown in Figure 4, our
modified GPT architecture achieves this loss nearly twice as
quickly in training steps as the original model, showing that
GPT-like architecture can take advantage of the structure
we imposed on half of the embedding dimensions. This
speedup, i.e., the number of epochs/steps taken to achieve
the same performance (SP: same performance epoch), is
even smaller for raw audio due to the quasi-stationary nature of audio signals at smaller time scales (20-30 ms for
harmonic sounds). For a sampling rate of 16KHz, a context length of 512 would correspond to 32ms, which may
be one of the reasons that some of the coordinates nail
down the contents of the context in fewer coordinates onto
which we impose structure. The convergence is significantly
faster for the raw waveform LLM setup and achieves nearly
twice the speed of text-8 and symbolic music. We also
ran benchmarks on LibriSpeech corpus about 1000 hours
of speech and acoustic tokens, further strengthening our
method is generic to handle several types and modalities of
tokens. We run our method on audio classification with Audio Transformer over 200 categories of audio for FSD-50K
benchmarks (Fonseca et. al, 2020). We get a performance
boost and speedups, thereby showcasing the ubiquity of our
proposed method for generative modelling and classification
as well. We also compare the absolute clock run times of
our modifications in both learnable/non-learnable setups.
Table 1 reports the time to complete one epoch relative to
our baseline architecture. Our method is computationally
inexpensive, as it only involves fixed kernel multiplication
or learning a single filter convolutional kernel with variable
context lengths along different coordinates.
4.2. Making multi-scale kernels learnable
We allow each kernel to be learnable. In the previous section,
we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approximate signals of intermediate layer activations across all
layers, with different resolutions occurring at different embedding dimensions to mimic a causal version of the wavelet
transform. Now, we allow each kernel of length L at a particular level to be learnable for computing the approximate
signal for various resolutions, yet another way to compute it.
By making the computation of approximate signal learnable,
the model can learn how to weight every decoder layer dimension instead of putting a fixed kernel, e.g. exponentially
weighted average. This as can be seen, Algorithm 1 only
allows 20k or 0.2 % extra parameters to our base decoder
architecture. We run the experiments both for learnable kernels and fixed kernels (three for each case) due to scarcity
of resources. Intuitively there will exist an optimal kernel
whose shape is best optimized for the next token prediction
for a specific modality of interest than simple Haar wavelet.
This further improves our performance from 42% to 48%
faster speedup to get a similar baseline performance, seen
in Figure 4, carried out on the text-8. We also benchmark
on Wiki-103 to demonstrate that our method works with
the GPT-2 tokenizer giving even larger gains. As shown
in Figure 5, we match the performance of a 10-layer architecture at more than twice the speed. In addition to faster
convergence, we see a 3.6-point improvement in perplexity
scores over the baseline model for Wiki-103. Section 4.4
shows we scale with model size and depth showing promise

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio | Unnamed: 0 | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approxRow 1: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: waveform with and without wavelet-based intermediate op- | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: imate signals of intermediate layer activations across all
Row 2: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: erations. Results showed significant performance improve- | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: layers, with different resolutions occurring at different emRow 3: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: ments in all modalities with the same number of training | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: bedding dimensions to mimic a causal version of the wavelet
Row 4: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: steps. To illustrate, a 0.04 decrease in validation loss is | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: transform. Now, we allow each kernel of length L at a parRow 5: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: comparable to going from a 16 to a 64-layer model on text-8 | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: ticular level to be learnable for computing the approximate
Row 6: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: dataset (papers-with code, 2024). As shown in Figure 4, our | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: signal for various resolutions, yet another way to compute it.
Row 7: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: modified GPT architecture achieves this loss nearly twice as | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: By making the computation of approximate signal learnable,
Row 8: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: quickly in training steps as the original model, showing that | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: the model can learn how to weight every decoder layer diRow 9: across three modalities : text, symbolic music, and audio: GPT-like architecture can take advantage of the structure | Unnamed: 0: | we defined the shape of the kernel and computed approx-: mension instead of putting a fixed kernel, e.g. exponentially
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
Modality Baseline Proposed SPE SpeedUp Rel. GPU Hrs
Text-8 0.93 0.92 14.5 42% 1.013
Raw Audio 1.84 1.70 3.7 85% 1.042
Symbolic Music 2.08 2.02 13 48% 1.059
Text-8 (L) 0.93 0.91 12.9 48% 1.094
Wiki-103 (L) 4.11 4.05 9.5 62% 1.130
LibriSpeech (L) 2.43 2.40 9.2 63% 1.110
FSD-50K 40.6% 42.8% 32 65% 1.037
Figure 5. Comparison of the negative-log likelihood (NLL) scores for our architecture across three modalities, with and without waveletbased fixed/learnable (L) structure. (Left) Table shows the NLL scores and speedup, with Same Performance Epoch (SPE) with baseline
as 25 epochs, relative GPU hours. (R) FSD-50K Audio Transformer top-5 accuracy results. Vertical green lines indicate the highest
accuracy achieved and the point where the same accuracy is reached 60% faster using our proposed method, with no extra parameters.
for improvements in larger LLM architectures.
4.3. Ablation on Depth And Model Dimension
The aim for these experiments was to see if our model scales
with depth of the Transformer and the model dimension.
We explore two architecture variants on text-8: (i) reducing
the model dimension from 128 to 32 and (ii) reducing the
number of layers. The model with 32-dimensional, 10 decoder layers (eight heads) achieves baseline performance in
around ten epochs and runs nearly twice as fast (Figure 4).
For the second experiment, we retain the architecture from
Table 1 but reduce the Transformer decoder to six layers
while keeping other parameters unchanged (feed-forward
dimension four times the model dimension, eight heads).
With Haar-inspired modifications, the model matches baseline performance twice as fast, consistent with the results
reported in Section 4.1. While it is difficult to scale the
architectures beyond a certain depth and model dimension
in academic setups: we believe that by seeing the effect of
model dimension and depth holding, we are confident that
the findings will extrapolate for much larger/deeper models.
4.4. Audio Classification Benchmark
We explore the strength of our method for a typical audio
classification on a standard audio classification benchmark
FSD-50K. The goal is to identify the sound categories in 1s
of audio correctly. We use a transformer-based architecture
similar to Audio Transformer as our baseline model. It
consists of 128 convolutional filters with a length of 200
learned over 25ms of audio sampled at 16KHz, yielding
patches of 400-length audio samples. The convolutional
filter output is then max-pooled across the 25ms window
to give a single vector of length 128, i.e. the number of
convolutional filters being fed to a Transformer stack of
6 layers with model dimension as 64 similar to (Verma &
Chafe, 2023; Verma & Berger, 2021). We report on the
top-5 % accuracy and relative gain in mAP scores for our
proposed architecture with learnable/non-learnable kernels.
We see that we get a performance boost of about 2% and a
faster convergence of more than 60%, as reported in Figure
5, for the learnable/fixed kernels and baseline.
4.5. Similarities and Differences With EMA
We compare Exponential Moving Averages (EMA) on intermediate signals. Unlike the Haar wavelet, which takes
fixed window weights, which takes the mean of the signal in the window, EMA uses an exponential kernel. Let
the signal xl
i(t), after the lth layer, be of length equal to
context length, with t being the token index from 0 to
L at embedding dimension i. The modified signal st is:
s0 = xl
i(0) st = αxl
i(t) + (1 − α)st−1 where α, the
decay factor, satisfies 0 < α < 1. Unlike an EMA, our
method captures multi-scale information using a finite kernel with zero weights outside a specified length. In text-8
experiments, we applied EMA on half of the embedding
dimensions, with α linearly varying between 0 and 1 for dimensions 64 to 128 mimicing our approach with a classical
approach. This under-performed compared to our baseline, with an NLL score of 0.94, while our baseline and
proposed method achieved scores of 0.93, 0.92, and 0.91
for non-learnable and learnable cases, respectively. Our
method provides a simple, signal processing-based scheme
that optimizes weights across multiple resolutions driven by
next-token prediction and outperforms EMA. Depending on
α, the EMA filter produces an exponential kernel while we
maintain a constant kernel or allow weights learned from
scratch optimized for the next token prediction. Further,
EMA is an Infinite-Impulse Response (IIR) filter, whereas
the Haar wavelet-based kernel is a Finite Impulse Response
(FIR) filter. Consequently, for each value update, the contributions from previous samples never reach zero. These
can accumulate significantly at longer context lengths for
certain α. The recursive, non-learnable nature of the EMA
IIR filter ensures some contribution from all embeddings,
which explains performance degradation. In contrast, our
method uses zero weights outside the kernel length, capturing multi-scale information.

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Modality | Baseline | Proposed | SPE | SpeedUp | Rel. GPU Hrs
Row 1: Modality: Text-8 | Baseline: 0.93 | Proposed: 0.92 | SPE: 14.5 | SpeedUp: 42% | Rel. GPU Hrs: 1.013
Row 2: Modality: Raw Audio | Baseline: 1.84 | Proposed: 1.70 | SPE: 3.7 | SpeedUp: 85% | Rel. GPU Hrs: 1.042
Row 3: Modality: Symbolic Music | Baseline: 2.08 | Proposed: 2.02 | SPE: 13.0 | SpeedUp: 48% | Rel. GPU Hrs: 1.059
Row 4: Modality: Text-8 (L) | Baseline: 0.93 | Proposed: 0.91 | SPE: 12.9 | SpeedUp: 48% | Rel. GPU Hrs: 1.094
Row 5: Modality: Wiki-103 (L) | Baseline: 4.11 | Proposed: 4.05 | SPE: 9.5 | SpeedUp: 62% | Rel. GPU Hrs: 1.13
Row 6: Modality: LibriSpeech (L) | Baseline: 2.43 | Proposed: 2.40 | SPE: 9.2 | SpeedUp: 63% | Rel. GPU Hrs: 1.11
Row 7: Modality: FSD-50K | Baseline: 40.6% | Proposed: 42.8% | SPE: 32.0 | SpeedUp: 65% | Rel. GPU Hrs: 1.037
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=2]
Columns: reported in Section 4.1. While it is difficult to scale the | Unnamed: 0 | dimensions, with α linearly varying between 0 and 1 for diRow 1: reported in Section 4.1. While it is difficult to scale the: architectures beyond a certain depth and model dimension | Unnamed: 0: | dimensions, with α linearly varying between 0 and 1 for di-: mensions 64 to 128 mimicing our approach with a classical
Row 2: reported in Section 4.1. While it is difficult to scale the: in academic setups: we believe that by seeing the effect of | Unnamed: 0: | dimensions, with α linearly varying between 0 and 1 for di-: approach. This under-performed compared to our base-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
Table 1. Performance on LRA tasks ((Tay et al., 2020b)) as reported in (Liu et al., 2024). Bold the best-performing model, and
underlined indicates the second-best. We use a baseline GPT
baseline (Section 5) and modify intermediate embeddings by imposing a hierarchical structure. Non-transformer-based, modified
attention-based or hybrid architectures are not reported.
Attention Based Models ListOps Text Image
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) 36.37 64.27 42.44
Local Attention (Tay et al., 2020b) 15.82 63.98 41.46
Linear Trans. (Vyas et al., 2020) 16.13 65.90 42.34
Linformer (Wang et al., 2020) 35.70 53.94 38.56
Sparse Trans. (Child et al., 2019) 17.07 63.58 44.24
Performer (Kaiser et al., 2021) 18.01 65.40 42.77
Sinkhorn (Tay et al., 2020a) 33.67 61.20 41.23
Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020) 35.63 64.02 40.83
BigBird (Zaheer et al., 2020) 36.05 64.02 40.83
Luna-256 (Ma et al., 2021) 37.25 65.78 47.86
Reformer (Kitaev et al., 2020) 37.27 56.10 38.07
Non-Causal
FNET (Lee-Thorp et al., 2022) 37.27 56.10 38.07
WavSPA (Zhuang et al., 2024) 55.40 81.60 55.58
(Ours) GPT Baseline 41.65 65.32 49.81
(Ours) WaveletGPT 57.5 66.38 59.81
5. Long Range Arena Benchmarks
We adapt our architecture for Long-Range Arena (LRA)
tasks (Tay et al., 2021), testing on long-range prediction
across text, images, and mathematical expressions. These
tasks evaluate the model’s ability to handle similarity, structure, and reasoning over extended contexts. We focus on
transformer-based architectures, as recently reported by (Liu
et al., 2024), while other variants include state-space, hybrid
models or tweaking attention mechanisms. For text, we
perform binary classification on the IMDb review dataset
(Maas et al., 2011) using byte-level data with a context
length of 2048 to determine if a movie review is positive or
negative. We use CIFAR-10 from the LRA benchmark for
images, classifying sequences of 3072 pixels into one of ten
categories. Lastly, we benchmark on Long ListOps, testing
the model’s ability to understand hierarchically structured
data in extended contexts. In our task, we use a version of
ListOps of sequence lengths of up to 2K to test the ability
to reason hierarchically while handling long contexts. The
model needs to access all tokens and model the logical structure of the inputs to make a prediction. The task is a ten-way
classification task and is considerably challenging. We use
the setup provided by (Khalitov et al., 2022) to extract the
data and be uniform with other benchmarks. We use identical architecture for all three modalities, only modifying the
embedding matrix to accommodate different tokenizers and
output categories. Our baseline consists of a 6-layer causal
Transformer decoder with a model dimension of 32 and a
feed-forward dimension four times that of the embedding
dimension. We extract the last token of the sequence as a
32-dimensional embedding for classification, followed by
a dense layer with 2048 neurons and a final dense layer
corresponding to the number of categories. The input goes
through an embedding layer that converts discrete tokens
into a 32-dimensional vector. The input vocabularies are
256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths
are 2048, 3072, and 1999 tokens, with 2, 10, and 10 as
output categories. In our modified architecture, we introduce our waveletGPT module between each decoder layer,
retaining half of the embedding dimensions as they are. For
the other half, we use non-learnable kernels, increasing the
kernel size from 2, 4, and 8 to 512 linearly for dimensions
16 to 32 while maintaining the causality assumption. This
introduces highways that hierarchically process data at each
embedding and Transformer decoder layer without adding
parameters, similar to our approach for pre-trained LLM.
As shown in Table 1, we achieve notable gains across all
three modalities, where even minor improvements are worth
reporting. We significantly outperform non-causal signal
processing based methods, such as (Zhuang et al., 2024),
with nearly 2% improvement on ListOps and 4.5% on a
much smaller architecture: ours has 32 dimensions and six
layers compared to 128 dimensions/eight layers. We limit
our comparison method for fairness only with vanilla Transformer architectures. We also compare two non-casual architectures incorporating signal processing-based ideas: FNET
and WavSPA. Compared to non-causal FNet, our model
significantly outperformed all three LRA tasks, achieving
20% improvement on ListOps and Image and 10% on text.
The most notable gain is in the ListOps task, which involves
modelling a hierarchical, tree-like structure of math operations, making our model particularly suitable. To the best
of our knowledge (Liu et al., 2024), this is the best result by
a simple attention-based Transformer on LRA tasks.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
We showcase a powerful incorporation of a core signal processing idea, namely wavelets, into large language model
pre-training. By imposing a multi-scale structure onto every
intermediate embedding, we achieve the same performance
40-60% faster than a baseline architecture without adding
any parameters. We achieve a substantial performance boost
if we train for the same number of steps. Further we show
strong gains in LRA benchmarks without adding any parameters by giving every next token prediction access to
multi-scale embeddings in every decoder layer. Our method
generalizes across three modalities: raw text, symbolic music, and raw audio, giving similar performance speedups on
several input representations, namely raw audio samples,
acoustic tokens, MIDI tokens, byte text, math expressions,
BPE tokens for text, raw image pixels and characters. This
shows it is generic enough for improving pre-training performance across datasets and input representations.

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Attention Based Models ListOps | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: Text | Unnamed: 3: Image | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: are 2048, 3072, and 1999 tokens, with 2, 10, and 10 as
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) 36.37 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 64.27 | Unnamed: 3: 42.44 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: output categories. In our modified architecture, we introRow 4: Unnamed: 0: Local Attention (Tay et al., 2020b) 15.82 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 63.98 | Unnamed: 3: 41.46 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: duce our waveletGPT module between each decoder layer,
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Linear Trans. (Vyas et al., 2020) 16.13 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 65.90 | Unnamed: 3: 42.34 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: retaining half of the embedding dimensions as they are. For
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: Linformer (Wang et al., 2020) 35.70 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 53.94 | Unnamed: 3: 38.56 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: the other half, we use non-learnable kernels, increasing the
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: Sparse Trans. (Child et al., 2019) 17.07 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 63.58 | Unnamed: 3: 44.24 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: kernel size from 2, 4, and 8 to 512 linearly for dimensions
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: Performer (Kaiser et al., 2021) 18.01 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 65.40 | Unnamed: 3: 42.77 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: Sinkhorn (Tay et al., 2020a) 33.67 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 61.20 | Unnamed: 3: 41.23 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: 16 to 32 while maintaining the causality assumption. This
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020) 35.63 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 64.02 | Unnamed: 3: 40.83 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: introduces highways that hierarchically process data at each
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: BigBird (Zaheer et al., 2020) 36.05 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 64.02 | Unnamed: 3: 40.83 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: embedding and Transformer decoder layer without adding
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: Luna-256 (Ma et al., 2021) 37.25 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 65.78 | Unnamed: 3: 47.86 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: parameters, similar to our approach for pre-trained LLM.
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: Reformer (Kitaev et al., 2020) 37.27 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 56.10 | Unnamed: 3: 38.07 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: As shown in Table 1, we achieve notable gains across all
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: Non-Causal | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: three modalities, where even minor improvements are worth
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: FNET (Lee-Thorp et al., 2022) 37.27 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 56.10 | Unnamed: 3: 38.07 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: reporting. We significantly outperform non-causal signal
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: WavSPA (Zhuang et al., 2024) 55.40 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 81.60 | Unnamed: 3: 55.58 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: processing based methods, such as (Zhuang et al., 2024),
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: (Ours) GPT Baseline 41.65 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 65.32 | Unnamed: 3: 49.81 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: with nearly 2% improvement on ListOps and 4.5% on a
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: (Ours) WaveletGPT 57.5 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 66.38 | Unnamed: 3: 59.81 | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: much smaller architecture: ours has 32 dimensions and six
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: layers compared to 128 dimensions/eight layers. We limit
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: our comparison method for fairness only with vanilla TransRow 23: Unnamed: 0: 5. Long Range Arena Benchmarks | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: former architectures. We also compare two non-casual archiRow 24: Unnamed: 0: tectures incorporating signal processing-based ideas: FNETWe adapt our architecture for Long-Range Arena (LRA) | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: and WavSPA. Compared to non-causal FNet, our modeltasks (Tay et al., 2021), testing on long-range prediction | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: significantly outperformed all three LRA tasks, achievingacross text, images, and mathematical expressions. These | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: 20% improvement on ListOps and Image and 10% on text.tasks evaluate the model’s ability to handle similarity, struc- | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: The most notable gain is in the ListOps task, which involvesture, and reasoning over extended contexts. | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: We focus on | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: modelling a hierarchical, tree-like structure of math opera-transformer-based architectures, as recently reported by (Liu | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: tions, making our model particularly suitable. To the bestet al., 2024), while other variants include state-space, hybrid | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: of our knowledge (Liu et al., 2024), this is the best result bymodels or tweaking attention mechanisms. | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: For text, we | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: a simple attention-based Transformer on LRA tasks.perform binary classification on the IMDb review dataset | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: (Maas et al., 2011) using byte-level data with a context | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: length of 2048 to determine if a movie review is positive or | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths: 6. Conclusion and Future Work
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: negative. We use CIFAR-10 from the LRA benchmark for | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: We showcase a powerful incorporation of a core signal pro-images, classifying sequences of 3072 pixels into one of ten | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 37: Unnamed: 0: cessing idea, namely wavelets, into large language modelcategories. Lastly, we benchmark on Long ListOps, testing | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: pre-training. By imposing a multi-scale structure onto everythe model’s ability to understand hierarchically structured | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: intermediate embedding, we achieve the same performancedata in extended contexts. In our task, we use a version of | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: 40-60% faster than a baseline architecture without addingListOps of sequence lengths of up to 2K to test the ability | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 41: Unnamed: 0: any parameters. We achieve a substantial performance boostto reason hierarchically while handling long contexts. The | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 42: Unnamed: 0: if we train for the same number of steps. Further we showmodel needs to access all tokens and model the logical struc- | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 43: Unnamed: 0: strong gains in LRA benchmarks without adding any pa-ture of the inputs to make a prediction. The task is a ten-way | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 44: Unnamed: 0: rameters by giving every next token prediction access toclassification task and is considerably challenging. We use | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 45: Unnamed: 0: multi-scale embeddings in every decoder layer. Our methodthe setup provided by (Khalitov et al., 2022) to extract the | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 46: Unnamed: 0: generalizes across three modalities: raw text, symbolic mu-data and be uniform with other benchmarks. We use identi- | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 47: Unnamed: 0: sic, and raw audio, giving similar performance speedups oncal architecture for all three modalities, only modifying the | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 48: Unnamed: 0: several input representations, namely raw audio samples,embedding matrix to accommodate different tokenizers and | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 49: Unnamed: 0: acoustic tokens, MIDI tokens, byte text, math expressions,output categories. Our baseline consists of a 6-layer causal | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
Row 50: Unnamed: 0: BPE tokens for text, raw image pixels and characters. ThisTransformer decoder with a model dimension of 32 and a | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 256 for text/image and 16 for ListOps. The context lengths:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
7. Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the Stanford Institute of HumanCentered AI (Stanford-HAI) through a Google Cloud computing grant for the academic year 2023. The author is
thankful to Prof. Dan Jurafsky for feedback and helpful
discussions on the problem and its impact on the field.
References
Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean,
J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Irving, G., Isard, M., et al.
{TensorFlow}: A system for {Large-Scale} machine
learning. In 12th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and implementation (OSDI 16), pp. 265–283,
2016.
Ahmed, N., Natarajan, T., and Rao, K. R. Discrete cosine
transform. IEEE transactions on Computers, 100(1):90–
93, 1974.
Al-Rfou, R., Choe, D., Constant, N., Guo, M., and Jones,
L. Character-level language modeling with deeper selfattention. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3159–3166, 2019.
Beltagy, I., Peters, M. E., and Cohan, A. Longformer: The long-document transformer. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pp. 6150–
6160, 2020. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/2020.emnlp-main.519/.
Borsos, Z., Marinier, R., Vincent, D., Kharitonov, E.,
Pietquin, O., Sharifi, M., Roblek, D., Teboul, O., Grangier, D., Tagliasacchi, M., et al. Audiolm: a language modeling approach to audio generation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 2023.
Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y ., Chen,
X., Choromanski, K., Ding, T., Driess, D., Dubey, A.,
Finn, C., et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models
transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.15818, 2023a.
Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y ., Dabis, J.,
Finn, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A.,
Hsu, J., et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world
control at scale. In Robotics: Science and Systems. RSS,
2023b.
Brown et, al, T. Language models are few-shot learners.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Caucheteux, C., Gramfort, A., and King, J.-R. Evidence of
a predictive coding hierarchy in the human brain listening
to speech. Nature human behaviour, 7(3):430–441, 2023.
Child, R., Elsen, E., Kim, D., and Hinton, G. Sparse transformer. In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), 2019.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.10509.
D´efossez, A., Copet, J., Synnaeve, G., and Adi, Y .
High fidelity neural audio compression. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.13438, 2022.
Dettmers, T., Pagnoni, A., Holtzman, A., and Zettlemoyer, L.
Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D.,
Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Bischof, H., and
Schiele, B. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=Yg6M6i5Zx0.
Fedus, W., Zoph, B., and Shazeer, N. Switch transformers:
Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
23(120):1–39, 2022.
Flores-Mangas, F. Discrete waveelet transform.
The Washington Post , Spring 2014. URL
https://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜mangas/
teaching/320/slides/CSC320L11.pdf.
Fonseca et. al, E. Fsd50k: an open dataset of human-labeled
sound events. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00475, 2020.
Gao, R. X. and Yan, R. Non-stationary signal processing
for bearing health monitoring. International journal of
manufacturing research, 1(1):18–40, 2006.
Goel, K., Gu, A., Donahue, C., and R´e, C. It’s raw! audio
generation with state-space models. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 7616–7633. PMLR,
2022.
Gu, Y ., Dong, L., Wei, F., and Huang, M. MiniLLM: Knowledge distillation of large language models. In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=5h0qf7IBZZ.
Hawthorne, C., Stasyuk, A., Roberts, A., Simon, I., Huang,
C.-Z. A., Dieleman, S., Elsen, E., Engel, J., and Eck, D.
Enabling factorized piano music modeling and generation

[PAGE 10]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
with the maestro dataset. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=H1gJq2R5K7.
He et. al, K. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp. 770, 2016.
Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., and Dean, J. Distilling
the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531, abs/1503.02531, 2015. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
Huang, C.-Z. A., Vaswani, A., Uszkoreit, J., Shazeer, N.,
Simon, I., Hawthorne, C., Dai, A. M., Hoffman, M. D.,
Dinculescu, M., and Eck, D. Music transformer: Generating music with long-term structure. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=rJe4ShAcF7.
Huang, K. and Aviyente, S. Wavelet feature selection for
image classification. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 17(9):1709–1720, 2008.
Kaiser, L., Likhosherstov, V ., Dohan, D., Song, X., Gane,
A., Sarlos, T., Hawkins, P., Davis, J., Mohiuddin, A., , Belanger, D., Choromanski, K., Colwell, L., and Weller, A.
Rethinking attention with performers. In Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=Ua6zuk0WRH.
Khalitov, R., Yu, T., Cheng, L., and Yang, Z. Sparse factorization of square matrices with application to neural attention modeling. Neural Networks, 152:160–168, 2022.
Kingsbury, N. and Magarey, J. Wavelet transforms in image
processing, 1998.
Kitaev, N., Kaiser, Ł., and Levskaya, A. Reformer: The
efficient transformer. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=rkgNKkHtvB.
Koutnik, J., Greff, K., Gomez, F., and Schmidhuber, J. A
clockwork rnn. In International conference on machine
learning, pp. 1863–1871. PMLR, 2014.
Langley, P. Crafting papers on machine learning. In Langley,
P. (ed.),Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML 2000), pp. 1207–1216, Stanford, CA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann.
Lee-Thorp, J., Ainslie, J., Eckstein, I., and Ontanon, S.
FNet: Mixing tokens with Fourier transforms. In Carpuat,
M., de Marneffe, M.-C., and Meza Ruiz, I. V . (eds.),Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pp. 4296–4313,
Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.
319. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
naacl-main.319.
Liu, Z., Li, S., Wang, L., Wang, Z., Liu, Y ., and Li, S. Z.
Short-long convolutions help hardware-efficient linear
attention to focus on long sequences. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.08128, 2024.
Ma, X., Kong, X., Wang, S., Zhou, C., May, J., Ma,
H., and Zettlemoyer, L. Luna: Linear unified
nested attention. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 34 (NeurIPS 2021) , pp. 1235–
1246, 2021. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
14319d9cfc6123106878dc20b94fbaf3-Abstract.
html.
Maas, A. L., Daly, R. E., Pham, P. T., Huang, D., Ng,
A. Y ., and Potts, C. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 142–150, Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL http://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/P11-1015.
Madani, A., McCann, B., Naik, N., Keskar, N. S., Anand,
N., Eguchi, R. R., Huang, P.-S., and Socher, R. Progen: Language modeling for protein generation. NeurIPS
workshop on ML For Structural Biology, 2020.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Deoras, A., Le, H.-S., Kombrink, S., and Cernocky, J. Subword language modeling
with neural networks. preprint (http://www. fit. vutbr.
cz/imikolov/rnnlm/char. pdf), 8(67), 2012.
Nawrot, P., Tworkowski, S., Tyrolski, M., Kaiser, L.,
Wu, Y ., Szegedy, C., and Michalewski, H. Hierarchical transformers are more efficient language models.
In Carpuat, M., de Marneffe, M.-C., and Meza Ruiz,
I. V . (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022 , pp. 1559–1571, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-naacl.
117. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
findings-naacl.117.
Nix, N. Silicon valley is pricing academics out
of ai research. The Washington Post , March
2024. URL https://www.washingtonpost.

[PAGE 11]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
com/technology/2024/03/10/
big-tech-companies-ai-research/ .
papers-with code. Language modelling on text8. March
2024. URL https://paperswithcode.com/
sota/language-modelling-on-text8 .
Selva, J., Johansen, A. S., Escalera, S., Nasrollahi, K., Moeslund, T. B., and Clap´es, A. Video transformers: A survey.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.
Sun, M., Liu, Z., Bair, A., and Kolter, J. Z. A simple and
effective pruning approach for large language models.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=PxoFut3dWW.
Tamkin et. al, A. Language through a prism: A spectral approach for multiscale language representations. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Tay, Y ., Metzler, D., Zhao, X., and Zheng, S. Sinkhorn transformer: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy
sorting. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pp. 9408–9419,
2020a. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
v119/tay20a.html.
Tay, Y ., Dehghani, M., Abnar, S., Shen, Y ., Bahri, D., Pham,
P., Rao, J., Yang, L., Ruder, S., and Metzler, D. Long
range arena : A benchmark for efficient transformers. In
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=qVyeW-grC2k.
Tay, Z., Dehghani, M., Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., and Uszkoreit, J. Local attention. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux,
M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozi`ere, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E.,
Azhar, F., et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Verma, P. Goodbye wavenet–a language model for raw
audio with context of 1/2 million samples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.08297, 2022.
Verma, P. and Berger, J. Audio transformers: Transformer
architectures for large scale audio understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.00335, 2021.
Verma, P. and Chafe, C. A generative model for
raw audio using transformer architectures. 2021
24th International Conference on Digital Audio Effects (DAFx) , pp. 230–237, 2021. URL https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
235683315.
Verma, P. and Chafe, C. A content adaptive learnable” timefrequency” representation for audio signal processing. In
ICASSP 2023, pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Verma, P. and Smith, J. A framework for contrastive and generative learning of audio representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11459, 2020.
Vyas, A., Katharopoulos, A., Pappas, N., and Fleuret,
F. Transformers are rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. In Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 5156–5165. PMLR, 2020. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2006.16236.
Wang, C., Chen, S., Wu, Y ., Zhang, Z., Zhou, L., Liu, S.,
Chen, Z., Liu, Y ., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec
language models are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02111, 2023.
Wang, S., Li, B. Z., Khabsa, M., Fang, H., and Ma, H.
Linformer: Self-attention with linear complexity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
Yan, W., Zhang, Y ., Abbeel, P., and Srinivas, A. Videogpt:
Video generation using vq-vae and transformers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.10157, 2021.
Yu, L., Simig, D., Flaherty, C., Aghajanyan, A., Zettlemoyer,
L., and Lewis, M. Megabyte: Predicting million-byte sequences with multiscale transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:78808–78823,
2023.
Zaheer, M., Guruganesh, G., Dubey, A., Ainslie, J.,
Alberti, C., Ontanon, S., Pham, P., Ravula, A., Wang,
Q., Yang, L., and Ahmed, A. Big bird: Transformers for longer sequences. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 17283–
17297, 2020. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
c8512d142a2d849725f31a9a7a361ab9-Abstract.
html.
Zhuang, Y ., Wang, Z., Tao, F., and Shang, J. Wavspa:
Wavelet space attention for boosting transformers’ long
sequence learning ability. In Proceedings of UniReps: the
First Workshop on Unifying Representations in Neural
Models, pp. 27–46. PMLR, 2024.

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec
Row 1: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: sorting. In Proceedings of the 37th International Con- | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: language models are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers.
Row 2: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: ference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 9408–9419, | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02111, 2023.
Row 3: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: 2020a. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/ | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec:
Row 4: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: v119/tay20a.html. | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: Wang, S., Li, B. Z., Khabsa, M., Fang, H., and Ma, H.
Row 5: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: Linformer: Self-attention with linear complexity. arXiv
Row 6: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: Tay, Y., Dehghani, M., Abnar, S., Shen, Y., Bahri, D., Pham, | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
Row 7: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: P., Rao, J., Yang, L., Ruder, S., and Metzler, D. Long | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec:
Row 8: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: range arena : A benchmark for efficient transformers. In | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: Yan, W., Zhang, Y., Abbeel, P., and Srinivas, A. Videogpt:
Row 9: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: International Conference on Learning Representations, | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: Video generation using vq-vae and transformers. arXiv
Row 10: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum? | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: preprint arXiv:2104.10157, 2021.
Row 11: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: id=qVyeW-grC2k. | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec:
Row 12: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: Yu, L., Simig, D., Flaherty, C., Aghajanyan, A., Zettlemoyer,
Row 13: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: Tay, Z., Dehghani, M., Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., and Uszko- | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: L., and Lewis, M. Megabyte: Predicting million-byte seRow 14: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: reit, J. Local attention. In Proceedings of the Interna- | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: quences with multiscale transformers. Advances in NeuRow 15: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b. | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: ral Information Processing Systems, 36:78808–78823,
Row 16: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: 2023.
Row 17: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec:
Row 18: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: Zaheer, M., Guruganesh, G., Dubey, A., Ainslie, J.,
Row 19: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: Azhar, F., et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation lan- | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: Alberti, C., Ontanon, S., Pham, P., Ravula, A., Wang,
Row 20: former: Generating long-form text via randomized greedy: guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023. | Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Li, J., et al. Neural codec: Q., Yang, L., and Ahmed, A. Big bird: Transform-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 12]
Wavelet-GPT: Wavelet Inspired Large Language Models
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of Machine Learning by enabling LLMs to be trained faster
and pushing the performance of the smaller architectures.
This will not only push the performance of the smaller
architectures, but also yield faster inference. There are many
potential societal consequences of our work, none which
we feel must be specifically highlighted here, as it shares
the same consequences in terms of positive and negative
aspects of LLMs and AI systems which can potentially
surpass human intelligence in near future.