[PAGE 1]
ShizishanGPT: An Agricultural Large Language
Model Integrating Tools and Resources
Shuting Yang1#, Zehui Liu1#, Wolfgang Mayer2, Ningpei Ding1, Ying Wang1,
Yu Huang1 , Pengfei Wu1 , Wanli Li1 , Lin Li3 , Hong-Yu Zhang1 , and
Zaiwen Feng1 ⋆
1 College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China
2 Industrial AI Research Centre, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, SA,
5095, Australia
3 College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, 430070, China
Abstract. Recent developments in large language models (LLMs) have
led to significant improvements in intelligent dialogue systems’ ability
to handle complex inquiries. However, current LLMs still exhibit limitations in specialized domain knowledge, particularly in technical fields
such as agriculture. To address this problem, we propose ShizishanGPT,
an intelligent question answering system for agriculture based on the Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) framework and agent architecture.
ShizishanGPT consists of five key modules: including a generic GPT-4
based module for answering general questions; a search engine module
that compensates for the problem that the large language model’s own
knowledge cannot be updated in a timely manner; an agricultural knowledge graph module for providing domain facts; a retrieval module which
uses RAG to supplement domain knowledge; and an agricultural agent
module, which invokes specialized models for crop phenotype prediction,
gene expression analysis, and so on. We evaluated the ShizishanGPT using a dataset containing 100 agricultural questions specially designed for
this study. The experimental results show that the tool significantly outperforms general LLMs as it provides more accurate and detailed answers
due to its modular design and integration of different domain knowledge
sources. Our source code, dataset, and model weights are publicly available at https://github.com/Zaiwen/CropGPT.
Keywords: Retrieval Augmented Generation·Large Language Models·
Knowledge Graphs· Agricultural information system.
1 Introduction
Recently, the advancement of large model technology has marked a significant
milestone in the field of artificial intelligence, showcasing impressive performance
⋆ Correspondences:yhuang,chriswpf,liwanli,hzaulilin,zhy630,Zaiwen.Feng@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
#These authors contribute equally to this work.
arXiv:2409.13537v1 [cs.CL] 20 Sep 2024

[PAGE 2]
2 S. Yang et al.
across various industry sectorss [1]. These models, trained on vast datasets, have
developed a remarkable ability to understand and generate human-like language,
which has led to their rapid adoption in sectors such as healthcare and education. Despite their widespread utility, the adaptation of language models for
specialized domains, particularly in agriculture and more specifically in the crop
domain,remainsinsufficientlydeveloped[2].Thislimitationsignificantlyimpacts
the application of such models in agricultural practices, including the utilization
of advanced genetic tools and the retrieval of specialized crop-related knowledge, which are critical for precision farming and enhanced crop management.
To address this problem, this paper proposes an intelligent question answering
system for agriculture based on the Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)
framework and agent architecture (ShizishanGPT). The system uses a large language model to answer questions related to the cultivation of crops (especially
maize) and helps users to solve problems by providing accurate answers through
access to relevant crop tools. For individuals who lack expertise in crops, the
system empowers smart agriculture by integrating specific functional requirements such as crop cultivation, enabling them to excel in knowledge-based tasks
within their area of expertise [3]. For instance, in scenarios where a user needs to
predict promoter enrichment values (a key indicator of gene expression potential
in specific DNA segments of the promoter region) ShizishanGPT leverages its
specialized modules to invoke external models that perform detailed calculations
and return precise predictions. This capability contrasts sharply with generalpurpose models like ChatGPT-4 [4], which, lacking domain-specific training and
integration capabilities, often fail to provide accurate or relevant responses in the
agricultural context. Figure 1 shows the contrasting responses from "ChatGPT"
and "ShizishanGPT" to a question about predicting promoter enrichment values for a maize DNA sequence. highlighting ShizishanGPT’s strength in solving
specific problems in the agricultural domain and providing accurate and credible
agricultural knowledge.
In this paper, the architectural underpinnings of ShizishanGPT include several key components, which include an Agricultural Knowledge Graph that maps
out critical data and relationships within the agricultural domain; a Vector
Knowledge Base that contains extensive papers in the domain related to Crop;
External tools which contain Gene Sequence Prediction tool that aid in the analysis of genetic data and Maize Phenotype Prediction tools [5]that help anticipate
crop characteristics based on genetic and environmental factors. We evaluate
our system using a dataset containing 100 question-answer pairs in the field of
agriculture, specially designed for this study, and demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed system. The paper is structured as follows: the introduction
provides background information on the research objectives; the second section
reviews related research and technologies; the third section details the design
and implementation of the system; the experimental section discusses the experimental validation and investigates the contributions of each element in an
ablation study; potential limitations of the study are discussed in the subsequent
section; the conclusion summarizes the contributions.

[PAGE 3]
ShizishanGPT 3
Example : ChatGPT vs. ShizishanGPT.
User query
: Hello, could you help me predict the promoter enrichment values for a certain variety of maize
with this DNA sequence
"TGAGTGAAGGCAGAATTGACCCATGCAGCTTCCTTTCTTTCACCACTCACTTGCTAGGAAACTACAAAAATAGAAAAAGAAA
ACTCACGGCAACCAAAAACGCGAACTCCTAGAGGGTTTCGAACACTTTGAAATTTGTATCAGACATCAAATGAAATCTTTAAC
TTCTT"?
ChatGPT :
Hello!
I'm sorry, I cannot help with predicng
promoter enrichment values based on a DNA
sequence.
For accurate predic$on and analysis of
promoter regions in DNA sequences, specialized
bioinforma$cs tools and so'ware are typically used.If
you have speciﬁc so'ware or databases available, I can
help you understand how to use them for analysis. If
not, you might need to use online tools like PROMO or
PlantCARE for predic$ons. If you need further
assistance, please let me know what speciﬁc support
you require
.
ShizishanGPT :
Hello!
The predicted promoter
enrichment value for this gene sequence is
-2.10213041305542.
This value indicates that
the level of promoter enrichment in this gene
region may be lower than expected or
rela$vely sparse. This situa$on may suggest
that gene regula$on in this area could be
nega$vely inﬂuenced by speciﬁc regulatory
factors, or it may reﬂect func$onal limita$ons
in this region during certain biological
processes.
Fig. 1. Example of ChatGPT versus ShizishanGPT in predicting maize gene promoter
enrichment values
2 Related Works
This section reviews related works on enhancing large language models (LLMs),
focusing on the integration of Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) and
agent-based frameworks, the use of knowledge graph-enhanced models, and the
application of external tools. It also discusses the implementation of knowledge
graphs in agriculture, showcasing how these technologies improve the accuracy
and utility of large models in complex tasks.
2.1 RAG and Agent-Based Frameworks for LLM Enhancement
Since the advent of LLMs like ChatGPT, these models have excelled in a variety
of language tasks [6] but still face challenges such as hallucinations [7], outdated
knowledge, and data constraints that affect their reliability, especially in tasks
requiring extensive and precise knowledge like open-domain question answering
and commonsense reasoning. The implementation of RAG has provided a pathway to address some of these limitations by enhancing the response accuracy
of LLMs in knowledge-intensive scenarios. The concept of Retrieval-Augmented
Generation, initially proposed by Lewis et al [8]. RAG has significantly enhanced
the effectiveness of LLM responses by providing contextual grounding from existing documents during the generation process [9]. RAG merges the retrieval and

[PAGE 4]
4 S. Yang et al.
answering processes, which improves the ability to effectively collect knowledge,
extract useful information, and generate answers. Additionally, the Reasoning
and Action (ReAct) [10] framework aids LLMs in managing complex tasks by
integrating multiple reasoning and action steps into the problem-solving process,
thus leading to more precise outputs [11].
ShizishanGPT leverages both Retrieval RAG and ReAct to boost its performance in complex agricultural tasks. Specifically enhanced by training on a
corpus of over a thousand scholarly articles, RAG improves the factual accuracy
and relevance of responses. Meanwhile, ReAct facilitates the handling of intricate
problem chains through structured reasoning and action sequences. This combination enables ShizishanGPT not only to provide data-driven, precise answers
but also to continually adapt to the evolving needs of the agricultural sector,
significantly enhancing the system’s utility and reliability in agricultural decision
support.
2.2 Knowledge Graph Enhanced Large Models
LLMs have become an important technology in modern AI, especially in the field
of Natural Language Processing (NLP), and are widely used in a variety of languageunderstandingandgenerationtasks.Thesemodels,suchasOpenAI’sGPT
family, Google’s BERT [12] and T5 [13], Facebook’s BART [14], LLama [15],
learn rich linguistic, contextual, and knowledge information by pre-training on
large-scale datasets, enabling them to perform various linguistic tasks without
explicit task instructions. In particular, LLMs have demonstrated exceptional
capabilities in question-answering systems. These models can provide exhaustive answers and generate innovative answers in specific situations by learning
from data, facts and world knowledge. For example, GPT-3 [16], with its large
model structure and training data, can answer complex questions without external database support.
To further improve answer quality and accuracy, knowledge graphs and external tools are becoming increasingly important in modern LLM-based QA systems. For example, in December 2023, a research team from China Agricultural
University (CAU) released ‘Shennong Big Model 1.0’ [17], an industry big model
applied to the agricultural field. The model is trained from a large amount of
high-quality agricultural knowledge data, including more than 10 million agricultural knowledge mapping data, more than 50 million modern agricultural
production data and more than 20,000 agricultural books. Based on the traditional big model technology architecture, it integrates knowledge graph, vector
database and other technologies to improve the accuracy of the answers.
2.3 External Tools Enhanced Large Models
Tool-enhanced Large Language Models (LLM) and agent-based large language
models frameworks have received much attention for their application in agriculture. The Tool Augmented Large Language Model framework utilises information from external tools to enhance the capabilities of the language model. [18]

[PAGE 5]
ShizishanGPT 5
In the agricultural domain, these external tools can include maize phenotype
prediction models, knowledge graphs in the agricultural domain as well as related literature, Google search engine, etc. By integrating with these tools, the
language model can understand and solve agriculture-related problems more accurately. For example, Qing et al [19] designed a pest identification system that
integrates a large language model with an external computer vision model, effectively combining it with other small external models to enhance the text comprehension and generation capabilities of the large model. Balaguer et al [20]
used retrieval-enhanced generation [21] and fine-tuning techniques to improve
the model’s responsiveness to region-specific problems. HuggingGPT [22] combines OpenAI’s GPT-4 [4] with the Hugging Face model library. It allows GPT-4
to act as a central manager, coordinating and invoking hundreds of small models
as external tools to solve specific tasks. This multi-model collaboration mechanism improves the adaptability of the system, allowing it to take advantage of
the strengths of different models to solve a variety of complex problems. The
agent-based language modelling framework handles requests to language models
through agents to improve the efficiency and performance of the system.
2.4 Knowledge Graphs in Agriculture
In agriculture, researchers are harnessing knowledge graphs to boost production efficiency and sustainability. These graphs amalgamate diverse agricultural
data, aiding in decision-making and providing precise management solutions.
Knowledge graphs, with their structured representation of knowledge, enhance
the interpretability of large language models used in their training [23]. Therefore, introducing knowledge graphs in the training process of large language
models helps to improve the interpretability of large language models. For example, Rezayi et al [24] proposed the AgriBERT model for matching food and
nutrients. The model, based on the structure of the BERT language model, was
pre-trained on a corpus dataset of academic journals and fine-tuned by augmenting the answers with a map of agricultural expertise, and the results showed a
significant improvement in the matching ability of the model. AgriKG [25], a
comprehensive agricultural knowledge graph utilized in this study, employs natural language processing to extract and connect entities and their relationships
from extensive agricultural data. This graph supports applications such as entity retrieval and intelligent QA. Leveraging AgriKG, this study develops an
intelligent QA system using large-scale language models. This system integrates
AgriKG’s data with user queries to deliver effective QA services.
3 System Design
3.1 Design of Prompt
In order to ensure that the model is able to generate relevant and accurate
responses to the complex needs of the agricultural domain, special attention

[PAGE 6]
6 S. Yang et al.
has been invested in the design of the system’s prompts. When processing and
analyzing agricultural data, well-designed prompts are essential to guide the
model in extracting and utilizing key information. Therefore, we designed the
hint generation mechanism in our system to dynamically adjust to the specific
content of the query, thus improving the accuracy and efficiency of information
retrieval.
Prompts Mechanisms: In the system, the design of prompts is based on
the automatic analysis of user queries, from which key information words and
action words are extracted, such as "corn," "yield," or "predict." These terms are
used to construct structured prompts tailored to specific queries, guiding data
retrieval and analysis. For example, for a query about the predicted phenotype
value of a specific DNA sequence of maize in the Huazhong region, the prompt
might be "Analyze the impact of a certain DNA sequence on maize growth rate
under the climatic conditions of the Huazhong region. " Based on these prompts,
the system invokes relevant knowledge graphs, databases, and prediction models,
and selects appropriate analytical tools to optimize query processing, ensuring
accurate and relevant results.
The Role of Prompts in System Architecture:Prompts act as a bridge
between the user query and the system’s comprehensive database, ensuring that
the model’s answers are not only relevant but also rich in domain-specific insights. By structuring key descriptors and verbs in the prompts, the system is
able to utilise its resources more efficiently, therefore, the design of the prompts
has a direct impact on the efficiency with which the system can process a particular query, speeding up the response and improving accuracy by reducing the
amount of data to relevant information, this approach enhances the system’s
ability to provide the user with solutions to a particular problem.
3.2 Workflow of System
The general workflow of the system is as follows: When a user inputs a question,
the system analyzes the question and selects the most relevant type of problem
description from its various functional modules. It then calls the appropriate
tools to complete the task. After receiving feedback, the large language model
dynamically adjusts the next step of the plan based on the feedback. Finally, it
summarizes based on the results and its own knowledge, ultimately providing the
user with a clear and useful answer. Our system employs the ReAct architecture;
if the agent’s first tool selection fails, it reanalyzes the problem based on the
returned results, chooses other appropriate tools for iterative execution, can also
decompose the problem into sub-problems, calls tools to obtain feedback, and
then executes the next step based on the feedback.

[PAGE 7]
ShizishanGPT 7
3.3 System Architecture
We propose an intelligent QA system for agricultural knowledge based on the
RAG framework and agent architecture, which adopts an integrated architecture
that combines advanced artificial intelligence techniques and data management
technologies, aiming to provide efficient and accurate QA services. The system
comprises multiple modules optimized for a specific function to ensure comprehensive and accurate question answering, shown in Figure 2. Specifically, the
system utilizes a large pre-trained language model to handle generic queries and
a search engine module to access the latest agricultural data and research in
real time. In addition, the system is embedded with a search vector database of
specialized literature to support accurate answers to in-depth domain questions.
Using the AgriKG knowledge graph, the system can provide detailed answers
to complex questions about crop types, suitable growing conditions, etc. The
system also integrates several small prediction models, such as maize phenotype
prediction (Resnet model architecture) and rice gene promoter enrichment value
prediction, to provide accurate agricultural decision support. The synergistic
work of these modules, managed through a unified user interface, ensures the
simplicity and efficiency of the system’s operation, enabling users to get instant
and accurate answers to their natural language queries, thus greatly improving
the intelligence of agricultural production and management.
VectorStore
Embeddings
Vector
Similarity
Related
Results
LLM
Answer
Query
Question
Embedding
Tools
Externalspecificmodels
AgriKG
Google
Search
LLM
Reasoning
Observations
Action
React
Text
Splitter
Documents
Text
Chunk1
Text
Chunkn
Text
Chunk2
.....
´
´
Fig. 2. Detailed Architecture Diagram of the Question Answering Pipeline
3.4 Modules in the Architecture
The modules are as follows:

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | AgriKG
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: React | Unnamed: 3: | AgriKG:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: Question | Unnamed: 1: LLM | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Observations | AgriKG:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Embedding | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | AgriKG: Google
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
8 S. Yang et al.
Problem analysis module:The Generic Module is based on large pre-trained
language models and focuses on generic questions, such as queries about the basics of agriculture. This module parses and answers questions using trained NLP
models chosen for their broad knowledge base and strong language understanding. The generic module first analyzes the user query to determine its nature
and whether additional knowledge sources are required.
Search module: The module can retrieve the latest agriculture-related information from external search engines, such as Google, and inject the resulting
information into the LLM prompt for answer generation. It aggregates and filters search results from multiple sources, extracts key content from web pages,
articles, and reports, and presents answers in summary form. By combining the
informationobtainedfromthesearchenginewiththeknowledgefromothermodules within the system, the search engine module provides users with rich and
cutting-edge answers to agricultural knowledge, especially for complex questions.
Retrieval module:This module leverages advanced natural language processing techniques by utilizing RAG [21] technology to bolster our QA system’s
capabilities in a two-step process: retrieval and generation. Initially, a robust
vector database searches through over a thousand specialized agricultural documents, including texts on crop breeding, disease control, and recent agricultural
innovations, to find those most pertinent to the user’s query. Once relevant literature is retrieved, a generative model uses this information to craft precise
responses. This extensive repository not only ensures rapid retrieval of relevant
documents but also provides essential context, greatly enhancing the QA system’s ability to handle specialized queries in agriculture. The system quickly
retrieves the document(s) closest to the user query. These retrieved documents
provide critical contextual information that lays the foundation for subsequent
answer generation as they significantly improve the performance of the QA system on specialized agricultural questions.
KnowledgeGraphmodule: TheKnowledgeGraphmoduleutilizestheAgriKG
Knowledge Graph [4] to inject structured agricultural knowledge into the system’s answering process, enhancing the expertise and accuracy of the questions
and answers. By pre-indexing information such as crop classification, climate
suitability, and pest control in AgriKG, the module can quickly retrieve the relevant knowledge required for a question. It maps the crop names and species
entered by the user to entities and relationships in the knowledge graph through
an API interface, extracting information such as crop classification and suitable
growing environments. The module can also recommend the best planting strategies and optimization suggestions based on the structured expert knowledge in
the knowledge graph.
External tool invocation module:This module integrates a variety of specialized predictive models about specific crops, including a maize phenotype

[PAGE 9]
ShizishanGPT 9
prediction model, maize gene promoter enrichment value prediction model, crop
growth prediction model, crop variety selection model, pest and disease monitoring and control model, agricultural weather warning model, agricultural technology consulting model, and crop market analysis model to answer crop-related
questions. The module automatically selects the appropriate model based on the
user’s question and invokes the model to obtain prediction and analysis results.
The module then combines these results with knowledge from other modules
within the system to synthesize multi-faceted answers. Using this module, the
system can accurately solve complex crop prediction and analysis problems and
provide detailed agricultural recommendations to the user.
4 Experiments
Dataset: Since there was no suitable QA dataset to fully test system performance, we did the work of building an agricultural QA dataset. Firstly, some
representativeproblemsarefoundfromexistingagriculturaldatabases,academic
papers, agricultural knowledge websites, etc. We consider crop cultivation, agricultural technology, pest control, agricultural processing and other aspects to
ensure a comprehensive and diverse set of issues. After getting the seed questions for each aspect, we used ChatGPT’s help to generate some related questions to expand our problem set. The quality of the dataset is then improved
by manual screening to remove duplicate questions and irrelevant content. In
order to ensure the accuracy and reliability of the answers, we get the correct
answers to these questions from professional agricultural websites. Finally, a
dataset containing 100 high-quality question answer pairs was constructed as
the experimental benchmark to evaluate and test the performance of the system
in the field of agricultural QA.
4.1 Machine Scoring
Method: We use BLEU, ROUGE, and GLEU to score standard and systemgenerated answers. For each question, a reference answer on a professional agricultural website is used as the benchmark for the answer generated by the evaluation system. The answers generated by each system were scored using the
following evaluation indicators.
BLEU: Calculates the n-gram overlap between the system’s generated answers and all reference answers, and calculates BLEU scores based on accuracy,
recall, and n-gram matches. Relying too heavily on phrase matching in BLEU
scoring is not advisable, as it may fail to consider contextual and semantic nuances. ROUGE: Calculates the degree of n-gram overlap between the system
generated answer and the reference answer, and calculates the ROUGE score
based on n-gram matches of different lengths. GLEU: The system evaluates
the syntactic and semantic consistency between the generated answer and the
reference answer, and calculates the GLEU score based on n-gram matches of

[PAGE 10]
10 S. Yang et al.
different lengths. GLEU provides a more fine-grained assessment than BLEU,
but is more computationally expensive.
A higher score indicates that the answers generated by the system are largely
similar to the standard answers, while a lower score indicates a gap.
Scoring Standard:
Composite Score = α ×BLEUScore + β ×ROUGEScore + γ ×GLEUScore (1)
Among them,α, β ,γ are the weights of each evaluation index, andα+β +γ = 1,
here we set α, β, γ to 0.4, 0.4, 0.2 respectively. The following is the specific
formula of each evaluation index:
BLEUScore = BP ×
P4
n=1BLEUn
!
(2)
Where BP is the short penalty factor andBLEU n represents theBLEU fraction
of an n-gram.
BLEUn = Count_clip(n)
Count_gen(n) (3)
Count_clip(n) is the minimum number of N-grams that the system generates
to match the reference answer.Count_gen(n) is the number of N-grams in the
answer generated by the system.
ROUGEScore(RS) = (1 −λ)×ROUGEL +λ×(ROUGESU×ω1 +ROUGELS×ω2)
(4)
Where λisthelongsentencepenaltyfactor, ROU GESU istheunorderedROUGE
fraction, ROU GELS is the ordered ROUGE fraction,ω1 and ω2 are the weights,
andω1 + ω2 = 1, where we setλ to 0.1 and bothω1 and ω2 to 0.5.
GLUEScore =
P4
n=1GLUEn
4 (5)
GLEUn = 2 ×Count_match(n)
Count_gen(n) +Count_ref(n) (6)
Count_match(n) is the number of N-grams matched between the system generated answer and the reference answer. Through the above formula, we can
get a comprehensive score considering multiple evaluation indicators. Adjust the
weights of α, β, γ, δ, λ, ω1, and ω2, and weigh the importance of different
evaluation indicators according to specific needs to get the final result.
Result: We evaluated the performance of the ShizishanGPT in the agricultural
question answering task and compared it with several other models. The results
of the comparison are shown in Figure 3. We set the standard answer score in the
data set to 1.0, and it can be seen that ShizishanGPT significantly outperforms

[PAGE 11]
ShizishanGPT 11
the other models in the BLUE and GLUE metrics. The performance on ROUGE
metrics is similar to other models. This indicates that it outperforms ChatGPT
and other models in terms of similarity and semantic consistency.
Table 1 presents a comparison of model scoring across different metrics, highlighting ShizishanGPT’s superior performance with a BLEU score of 0.88, a
ROUGE score of 0.79, and a GLEU score of 0.85, culminating in a composite score of 0.923. This outpaces other models such as ChatGPT-4, Claude,
WenXinYiYan, and ZhiPuAI, which demonstrate varying degrees of effectiveness
withChatGPT-4performingrelativelywellwithacompositescoreof0.876.ShizishanGPT can acquire knowledge that the model itself does not have from the
literature vector library and knowledge graph, and deal with skills that other
modelsdonothavefromexternaltools.ThisresultshowsthattheShizishanGPT
has higher accuracy and reliability in intelligent question-answering in the agricultural field.
Fig. 3. Comparative Analysis of Language Model Scores on BLEU, ROUGE, GLEU,
and Composite Metrics
T able 1.Comparison of model scoring
Model BLEU ScoreROUGE ScoreGLEU ScoreComposite Score
ShizishanGPT 0.88 0.79 0.85 0.923
ChatGPT-4 0.82 0.77 0.80 0.876
Claude 0.80 0.75 0.79 0.857
WenXinYiYan0.76 0.73 0.74 0.818
ZhiPuAI 0.75 0.74 0.73 0.815

[TABLE page=11 index=1]
Columns: Model BLEU Score ROUGE Score GLEU Score Composite Score | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: Model BLEU Score ROUGE Score GLEU Score Composite Score: ShizishanGPT 0.88 | Unnamed: 0: 0.79 0.85 0.923
Row 2: Model BLEU Score ROUGE Score GLEU Score Composite Score: ChatGPT-4 0.82 | Unnamed: 0: 0.77 0.80 0.876
Row 3: Model BLEU Score ROUGE Score GLEU Score Composite Score: Claude 0.80 | Unnamed: 0: 0.75 0.79 0.857
Row 4: Model BLEU Score ROUGE Score GLEU Score Composite Score: WenXinYiYan 0.76 | Unnamed: 0: 0.73 0.74 0.818
Row 5: Model BLEU Score ROUGE Score GLEU Score Composite Score: ZhiPuAI 0.75 | Unnamed: 0: 0.74 0.73 0.815
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 12]
12 S. Yang et al.
4.2 Manual Scoring
Scoring Guidelines:In this study, we conducted a manual evaluation through
several key steps to ensure the fairness and accuracy of the assessment. First, we
selected evaluators with a background in agriculture, who specialize in assessing
question-and-answer systems. The evaluators scored the answers generated by
the models without knowing their sources. The scoring criteria were divided
into three categories: Accuracy, Professionalism, and Language Fluency. Each
category’s specific standards were thoroughly explained during the training of
evaluators to ensure consistency and accuracy in scoring. Each category had a
maximum score of 10, and the final total score was calculated using the following
weights: Accuracy accounted for 50%, Professionalism for 30%, and Language
Fluency for 20%. This weighting ensured a comprehensive assessment of the
models’ overall performance. To enhance the reliability of the evaluation, we
implemented a cross-checking mechanism, ensuring that each answer was scored
by at least three independent evaluators. This helped eliminate potential biases
from individual scorers and also allowed us to verify the stability and fairness
of the scoring system by comparing the consistency of scores among different
evaluators.
Scoring Criteria: Accuracy: Assesses how well the model answer corresponds to the requirements of the question and how correct the information is.
Professionalism: To see if the terms and concepts used in the answer are in line
with standards and common sense in the agricultural field. Language Fluency:
Evaluate whether the answer is natural and grammatically correct.
T able 2.Results on Agricultural QA Tasks
Model Name Accuracy Professionalism Language FluencyTotal Score
GPT4 9.2 9.3 9.5 9.29
Claude 9.1 9.3 9.6 9.26
WenXinYiYan8.9 9.4 9.2 9.11
ZhiPuAI 8.7 9.1 9.3 8.94
ShizishanGPT 9.8 9.5 9.5 9.65
Table 2 shows the results of the experiment, Our results indicate that ShizishanGPT outperformed other models with a composite score of 9.65, excelling
particularly in accuracy (9.8) and professionalism (9.5). On the other hand,
ZhiPuAI scored the lowest overall, with a total of 8.94, suggesting areas for improvement, especially in accuracy (8.7). Models like GPT4 and Claude showed
competitive results with overall scores of 9.29 and 9.26, respectively, demonstrating strong language fluency capabilities. These findings highlight the significant
potential of employing specialized language models in enhancing the precision
and effectiveness of responses in agricultural domains.

[TABLE page=12 index=1]
Columns: Model Name Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: Model Name Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: GPT4 9.2 | Unnamed: 0: 9.3 9.5 9.29
Row 2: Model Name Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: Claude 9.1 | Unnamed: 0: 9.3 9.6 9.26
Row 3: Model Name Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: WenXinYiYan 8.9 | Unnamed: 0: 9.4 9.2 9.11
Row 4: Model Name Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: ZhiPuAI 8.7 | Unnamed: 0: 9.1 9.3 8.94
Row 5: Model Name Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: ShizishanGPT 9.8 | Unnamed: 0: 9.5 9.5 9.65
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 13]
ShizishanGPT 13
4.3 Ablation Experiments
We conducted an ablation experiment to demonstrate each component’s impact
on our system. We disabled individual aspects of the system, such as RAG and
external predictive models, and evaluated the system’s performance again. We
used the same QA dataset, metrics, and analysis procedure as in the previous
experiment. Table 3 shows the results of our experiment for the different configurations.
T able 3.Results of the ablation study
Configuration Accuracy Professionalism Language FluencyTotal Score
Full ShizishanGPT9.8 9.5 9.5 9.65
- RAG 9.1 9.2 9.5 9.21
- Tools 9.4 9.3 9.4 9.37
- AgriKG 9.6 9.4 9.4 9.50
- Search 9.5 9.3 9.5 9.44
As can be seen from the data, the full configuration of ShizishanGPT demonstrated the highest overall performance with scores of 9.8 in Accuracy, 9.5 in Professionalism, and 9.1 in Language Fluency, culminating in a total score of 9.65.
When individual components were incrementally removed, the model showed
varying degrees of performance impact. Notably, the removal of AgriKG resulted in a slight improvement in Accuracy and Professionalism, indicating a
robustness in the remaining components, with a new total score of 9.50. Conversely, the removal of the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) component
resulted in the most significant drop in total score to 9.21, underscoring its
critical role in enhancing model performance. Each configuration, whether ’Tools’, ’- Search’, or others, exhibited distinct impacts on specific metrics, but
consistently maintained high performance across all metrics, demonstrating the
architecture’s resilience and the effectiveness of its components.
5 Limitations
Althoughtheresultsofourexperimentareencouraging,itisimportanttodiscuss
potential limitations.
Dataset limitations: The dataset used in this article was generated by
GPT-4 and may be affected by the quality of the questions due to limitations
and biases in GPT-4’s training data and question generation capabilities. Since
the seed problem was found manually, the representativeness of the dataset may
also have certain limitations.
Scope limitations:In terms of universality and generalization, the research
in this paper may only apply to a specific environment or scope of questions.
The research in this article may apply only to the field of agriculture and only
to specific crops and regions.

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: Configuration Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: Configuration Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: Full ShizishanGPT 9.8 | Unnamed: 0: 9.5 9.5 9.65
Row 2: Configuration Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: - RAG 9.1 | Unnamed: 0: 9.2 9.5 9.21
Row 3: Configuration Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: - Tools 9.4 | Unnamed: 0: 9.3 9.4 9.37
Row 4: Configuration Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: - AgriKG 9.6 | Unnamed: 0: 9.4 9.4 9.50
Row 5: Configuration Accuracy Professionalism Language Fluency Total Score: - Search 9.5 | Unnamed: 0: 9.3 9.5 9.44
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 14]
14 S. Yang et al.
6 Conclusion
This study successfully integrates a knowledge graph-enhanced large-scale languagemodelwithanexternaltoolmoduleandaretrievalvectordatabasemodule
to construct a comprehensive intelligent QA system for agriculture. Experimental results show that the system exhibits good performance and accuracy in
answering agriculture-related questions, and the response quality of the system
is further enhanced by calling the external tool module and retrieval vector
database module.
We have successfully demonstrated intelligent querying, reasoning, and retrieval of agricultural knowledge, providing more comprehensive and effective
support for agricultural production and decision-making. In the future, we will
further improve the system’s responses and the scope of questions it can address
to meet the growing demand for agricultural information.
Acknowledgment. This research project was supported in part by National
KeyResearchandDevelopmentProgramofChinaunderGrant2023YFF1000100,
and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Chinese Central Universities under Grant 2662023XXPY004.
References
1. GUO Wang, YANG Yusen, WU Huarui, ZHU Huaji, MIAO Yisheng, GU Jingqiu.
Big Models in Agriculture: Key Technologies, Application and Future Directions[J].
Smart Agriculture, 2024, 6(2): 1-13.
2. Silva, B., Nunes, L., Estevão, R., & Chandra, R. (2023). GPT-4 as an Agronomist
Assistant? Answering Agriculture Exams Using Large Language Models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.06225.
3. Ye, S., Lauer, J., Zhou, M., Mathis, A., & Mathis, M. (2024). AmadeusGPT: a
natural language interface for interactive animal behavioral analysis. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 36.
4. Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F. L., ... &
McGrew, B. (2023). Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.
5. Zhu, W., Han, R., Shang, X., Zhou, T., Liang, C., Qin, X., & Li, L. (2024). The
CropGPT project: Call for a global, coordinated effort in precision design breeding
driven by AI using biological big data. Molecular Plant, 17(2), 215-218.
6. Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805.
7. Yao, J. Y., Ning, K. P., Liu, Z. H., Ning, M. N., & Yuan, L. (2023). Llm lies:
Hallucinations are not bugs, but features as adversarial examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.01469.
8. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin,
Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et
al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9459–9474, 2020.

[PAGE 15]
ShizishanGPT 15
9. Dong, J., Fatemi, B., Perozzi, B., Yang, L. F., & Tsitsulin, A. (2024). Don’t
Forget to Connect! Improving RAG with Graph-based Reranking. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.18414.
10. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., & Cao, Y.
(2022). React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.03629.
11. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., ... & Zhou,
D. (2022). Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 35, 24824-24837./
12. Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805.
13. Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., ... & Liu,
P. J. (2020). Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140), 1-67.
14. Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O.,
... & Zettlemoyer, L. (2019). Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training
for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.13461.
15. Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M. A., Lacroix, T., ...
& Lample, G. (2023). Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971.
16. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., ...
& Amodei, D. (2020). Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 33, 1877-1901.
17. https://www.agri-chat.cn
18. Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dessì, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli, M., Hambro, E., ... &
Scialom, T. (2024). Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36.
19. Qing, J., Deng, X., Lan, Y., & Li, Z. (2023). GPT-aided diagnosis on agricultural
image based on a new light YOLOPC. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture,
213, 108168.
20. Balaguer, A., Benara, V., de Freitas Cunha, R. L., Estevão Filho, R. D. M., Hendry,
T., Holstein, D., ... & Chandra, R. (2024). RAG vs Fine-tuning: Pipelines, Tradeoffs,
and a Case Study on Agriculture. arXiv e-prints, arXiv-2401.
21. Gao, Y., Xiong, Y., Gao, X., Jia, K., Pan, J., Bi, Y., ... & Wang, H. (2023).
Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.10997.
22. Shen, Y., Song, K., Tan, X., Li, D., Lu, W., & Zhuang, Y. (2024). Hugginggpt:
Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36.
23. TANG Wentao, HU Zelin. Survey of Agricultural Knowledge Graph[J]. Computer
Engineering and Applications, 2024, 60(2): 63-76.
24. Rezayi, S., Liu, Z., Wu, Z., Dhakal, C., Ge, B., Zhen, C., ... & Li, S. (2022, July).
AgriBERT: Knowledge-Infused Agricultural Language Models for Matching Food
and Nutrition. In IJCAI (pp. 5150-5156).
25. Chen, Y., Kuang, J., Cheng, D., Zheng, J., Gao, M., & Zhou, A. (2019). AgriKG:
An agricultural knowledge graph and its applications. In Database Systems for
Advanced Applications: DASFAA 2019 International Workshops: BDMS, BDQM,
and GDMA, Chiang Mai, Thailand, April 22–25, 2019, Proceedings 24 (pp. 533537). Springer International Publishing.