[PAGE 1]
GP-GPT: Large Language Model for Gene-Phenotype Mapping
Yanjun Lyu1, Zihao Wu 2, Lu Zhang 3, Jing Zhang 1, Yiwei Li 2, Wei Ruan 2, Zhengliang Liu 2,
Zeyu Zhang 1, Xiang Li 4, Rongjie Liu 5, Chao Huang 6, Wentao Li 7, Tianming Liu 2, and
Dajiang Zhu 1
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, TX 76015, USA
2School of Computing, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA
3Department of Computer Science, Indiana University Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA
4Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA
5Department of Statistics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA
6Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, University of Georgia, GA 30602, USA
7Department of Environmental Health Science, University of Georgia, GA 30602, USA
Abstract
Pre-trained large language models(LLMs) have attracted increasing attention in biomedical
domains due to their success in natural language processing. However, the complex traits and
heterogeneity of multi-sources genomics data pose significant challenges when adapting these
models to the bioinformatics and biomedical field. To address these challenges, we present GPGPT, the first specialized large language model for genetic-phenotype knowledge representation
and genomics relation analysis. Our model is fine-tuned in two stages on a comprehensive corpus
composed of over 3,000,000 terms in genomics, proteomics, and medical genetics, derived from
multiple large-scale validated datasets and scientific publications. GP-GPT demonstrates proficiency in accurately retrieving medical genetics information and performing common genomics
analysis tasks, such as genomics information retrieval and relationship determination. Comparative experiments across domain-specific tasks reveal that GP-GPT outperforms state-of-the-art
LLMs, including Llama2, Llama3 and GPT-4. These results highlight GP-GPT’s potential to
enhance genetic disease relation research and facilitate accurate and efficient analysis in the
fields of genomics and medical genetics. Our investigation demonstrated the subtle changes of
bio-factor entities’ representations in the GP-GPT, which suggested the opportunities for the
application of LLMs to advancing gene-phenotype research.
1 Introduction
The relationship between genes, phenotypes and diseases is of fundamental importance but has not yet
been fully understood. Due to the complex interplays and mutual regulations among genes, proteins,
metabolomics, and phenotypes, finding the proper representations of their relationship has become
a significant problem. There are numerous studies that focus on single-molecule or dual-molecule
biological levels such as gene mutation, proteomic, gene expression, transcriptional regulation,
pathway analysis, and clinical observation. These studies aim to address the questions in specific areas
using simplified modelling. Existing research in human populations has elucidated the landscape
of complex genomic relations. For instance, Genome-wide association study (GWAS) [1, 2, 3]
arXiv:2409.09825v4 [cs.CL] 21 Nov 2025

[PAGE 2]
is a well-established and effective approach for statistically discovering genetic loci associated
with common diseases. Meta-analysis of genetic association provides new insights into cohorts of
independent gene–disease associations study by combining them and resolving the discrepancies [4].
Genome annotation aims at understanding specific functional and structural properties which
were conferred by nucleotide regions and amino acid sequences [5]. The Gene Ontology (GO)
knowledge base (http://geneontology.org) comprehensively mapped the gene, functions of genes,
and gene products into a formatted network [6] while human-specific gene networks like HumanNet
v2 (http://www.inetbio.org/humannet) comprises a hierarchy of networks about gene-disease-drug
associations [7]. The Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man(OMIM) [8] and DisGeNET [9] are essential
knowledge platforms for disease genomics. Such large-scale genomics datasets and relevant studies
have significantly expanded the scope of representative analysis of genes and diseases. However,
holistic modeling at the whole genome-system scale remains challenging.
To better address this fundamental problem of representing and mapping genes and related phenotypes/diseases, the ideal approach should consider the entire genome system collectively across
various molecular and biological levels. Additionally, it should incorporate experimental knowledge,
bio-computational evidence, and biological text data, which have been overlooked in previous studies
despite their considerable value. Large language models(LLMs) have emerged as transformative
tools in natural language processing, demonstrating unprecedented capabilities in understanding and
generating human-like text [10, 11, 12, 12]. These models, trained on extensive corpora, have shown
remarkable versatility across diverse domains [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. There are also significant
successes in applying language models to the general biomedical field [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. LLM’s
potential to process and analyze complex, unstructured data presents a unique opportunity to address
long-standing challenges in bioinformatics. The ability of LLMs to capture intricate relationships
and context from text aligns well with the complexities inherent in genetic and phenotype data.
This synergy opens new avenues for knowledge discovery, hypothesis generation, and the elucidation
of previously obscure gene-disease associations.
In this study, we focus on transforming the aforementioned problem into an AI-based system based on
a gene-phenotype large language model, named GP-GPT. The main goal of GP-GPT is to integrate
multiple sources of structured and unstructured genomic knowledge into a general LLM framework.
Particularly, the model leverages both structured and unstructured data from multiple main data
sources from OMIM, DisGeNET, and dbGaP [26]. By converting the data into bio-text, we identified
and categorized gene entities, gene functions, protein entities, protein functions, phenotype entities,
genotype-phenotype association analysis, and related biological mechanisms. These components were
then integrated into an informative context, which was subsequently used to develop the GP-GPT in
the form of generative language models. Therefore, the model considers multiple levels of bio-factors
and achieves knowledge mapping of the entire genome system rather than individual relationships.
For the first time, as far as we know, we applied large language models on multi-levels of genomics
data. Our study focuses on three critical NLP tasks in the domain of genetic and phenotypic
data analysis. First, we explore the model’s capacity for question answering, assessing its ability
to provide accurate responses to complex queries in medical genetics. Second, we assessed the
model’s performance in retrieving genomics information, particularly its ability to identify associated
genes or phenotypes by providing the corresponding information. Finally, we examined the model’s
proficiency in relation determinations and evaluated its ability to accurately identify relationships
between genotypes and phenotypes in given contexts. These tasks are designed to evaluate the
potential of language models in enhancing our understanding and interpretation of genomics data,
potentially accelerating discoveries in the field of medical genetics. We observed a better performance

[PAGE 3]
of GP-GPT on multiple metrics against benchmark language models. Thus, GP-GPT enables
simplified and quick retrieval of crucial medical genetics information (e.g., molecule name, functions,
interactions, and disease associations).
In addition, GP-GPT indirectly encodes the genomics knowledge graph. Especially for the phenotype/disease gene mapping, the model extended beyond the generation of trustworthy answers based
on literature-based genomics questions provided by users. Interestingly, we observed the distribution
of the gene embeddings and phenotype/disease embeddings. Compared to benchmark language
models, our GP-GPT encodes genomics entities more efficiently in terms of both model depth and
training progression. This aggregation and balancing of latent embeddings could be observed in
terms of gene-phenotype relation pairs and gene-disease tissue distribution. The results show that
the learned representations of genomics information in GP-GPT have the potential to support the
holistic human genomics knowledge graph and play as a strong knowledge-aware system to provide
prior probability in quantitative association analysis.
2 Related Work
2.1 Language models for Knowledge Embedding and Relation Extraction
Recently, language models such as ChatGPT and GPT-4 [11], have shown remarkable capabilities in
accelerating research innovation across natural sciences. ChatGPT, GPT-4, GPT-4V, and GPT-4
Turbo, developed by OpenAI, are prominent language models based on the autoregressive transformer
decoder architecture, which utilizes self-attention mechanisms. These models, trained on extensive
text corpora, excel in generating human-like text and demonstrate profound comprehension across
diverse knowledge domains. In contrast, open-source models like Meta’s LLaMA [12] and Llama2 [12],
which feature up to 70B parameters in their largest versions, aim to enhance training efficiency
and reduce computational costs. Similarly, BLOOM (176B version) [27] and BLOOMZ (176B
version) [28] emphasize linguistic versatility, highlighting a commitment to openness and accessibility.
The more recent Falcon [29], with 40B parameters in its largest configuration, has also shown
excellent performance on various benchmarks. These models exemplify the cutting-edge of universal
language model research. LLaMA models, in particular, have performed exceptionally well on diverse
benchmarks, making them some of the most popular open language models to date, hence their
selection for analysis in this paper.
Biomedical natural language processing enables the automatic extraction of crucial information from
medical literature, including insights into genetic diseases and associated variants. A key task in
this field is Biological Relation Extraction (RE), which involves identifying relationships between
two or more entities within specific contexts, which is crucial to identify biological entities such as
genes, proteins, diseases, drugs, and miRNAs in textual data [9, 30, 31, 32]. Biological RE models
are widely used to extract knowledge from various sources, including medical literature. A key task
in Biological RE is identifying relationships between two or more entities within specific contexts.
To advance NLP and machine learning techniques for biomedical RE, considerable effort has been
invested in developing relevant corpora [33, 34, 35, 36]. Unlike simple regular expression-based
methods, Biological RE models leverage the entire context of a sentence to accurately identify
and classify these entities, overcoming the limitations of more traditional approaches. Although
machine learning (ML) techniques generally outperform traditional methods, they require substantial
amounts of manually annotated training data. This presents a significant challenge, especially in the
genomics domain, where labelling training sequences at the individual word level is time-consuming
and requires domain-specific expertise. Owing to large language models which offers a solution by

[PAGE 4]
enabling fine-tuning for Biological RE tasks with minimal training data, thereby reducing the burden
of extensive manual annotation.
2.2 Instruction Fine-tuning and Parameter efficient Training
Instruction fine-tuning has emerged as a pivotal technique in improving the performance and
generalization of language models across various tasks. The work by Wei et al. [37] introduces a
novel training methodology that leverages instruction fine-tuning to enhance model capabilities. By
fine-tuning models on multiple tasks with carefully curated instructions, this approach not only
improves task-specific performance but also enhances the model’s ability to generalize across different
domains.
The Stanford CRFM report [38] further substantiates the efficacy of instruction fine-tuning. The
report provides a comprehensive evaluation of different models and training strategies, demonstrating
that instruction fine-tuning can achieve significant improvements in performance even with limited
computational resources. This underscores the potential of instruction fine-tuning as a cost-effective
solution for developing versatile language models.
Parameter-efficient training methods aim to optimize model performance while minimizing computational overhead [39]. Recent advancements in this field are well-documented in the work by Liu et
al. [38], which explores various parameter-efficient techniques [40]. These techniques are designed to
reduce the number of trainable parameters without compromising model accuracy, making them
particularly suitable for environments with constrained resources .
Key innovations include low-rank adaptation, pruning, and quantization, which collectively contribute
to maintaining model efficacy with fewer parameters. Experimental results in Liu et al. [41] highlight
that such methods can achieve near state-of-the-art performance with a fraction of the computational
cost, thereby promoting sustainable AI development practices.
Combining instruction fine-tuning with parameter-efficient training presents a promising avenue
for future research [42]. Integrating these methods can potentially lead to the development of
highly adaptable and resource-efficient models. The synergy between these approaches lies in their
complementarystrengths: instructionfine-tuningenhancestaskadaptability, whileparameter-efficient
training ensures computational feasibility.
Overall, the convergence of instruction fine-tuning and parameter-efficient training methodologies
signifies a crucial step towards creating robust, efficient, and scalable AI systems. Continued
exploration and refinement in these areas are expected to drive further innovations in the field of
machine learning and artificial intelligence.
2.3 Language Model Applications in Bioinformatics
In recent years, the emergence of language models for bioinformatics has shown significant progress,
with notable examples including AlphaFold2 [43], AlphaFold3 [44], GeneGPT [45], BioT5 [46],
BioT5+ [47], and Med-Gemini [48]. These models can be categorized into single-domain and
multi-domain approaches, each leveraging different strategies for pretraining and application in the
field.
Single-domain approaches pretrain their models solely on tokens from a specific domain. A prominent
example is GeneGPT [45], which introduces a novel method for teaching large language models
(LLMs) to utilize the Web APIs of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) to

[PAGE 5]
answer genomics-related questions. By focusing exclusively on genomics data, GeneGPT can provide
precise and relevant responses tailored to this domain.
Based on different foundational models, large language models in the bio-informatics domain can be
categorized into BERT-based LLMs, T5, GPT and others [49]. BERT-based large models related to
biology include the SciBERT model. SciBERT is pre-trained on scientific publications from Semantic
Scholar, mainly using the WordPiece unsupervised tokenization technique [50]. ClinicalBERT is a
pre-trained model built on a BERT-based architecture using clinical notes as training data. The types
of clinical notes include nursing, radiology, and others [51]. SciFive is a T5-based generative model
pre-trained on millions of PubMed abstracts and PMC scientific publications. This model excels at
handling biomedical tasks such as question answering and named entity recognition, outperforming
models like BioBERT, T5, and BERT [52]. BioGPT is a GPT-2-based model pre-trained on 15
million PubMed articles, making it one of the first GPT-inspired biomedical frameworks. At the
time, it was also one of the top-performing models in its domain [53].
In the application of large language models to biological sequence data, research can be broadly
categorized into four areas: DNA sequences, RNA sequences, protein sequences, and multi-omics
sequencing data. Each of these areas presents unique challenges and opportunities for decoding and
understanding biological systems. For DNA sequences, models such as Enformer [54], Nucleotide
Transformer [55], GenSLMs [56], and HyenaDNA [57] have been developed to decipher the genetic
blueprint of life, advancing our understanding of gene regulation, function, and expression. Similarly,
in the study of ribonucleic acid (RNA), foundational models like RNABERT [58], RNA-FM [59] are
instrumental in unravelling the complex mechanisms that drive RNA-mediated biological processes.
These models play a crucial role in areas such as transcriptomics and gene expression analysis. In the
protein domain, where the focus is on protein structure, function, and interactions, numerous models
have been proposed, such as AlphaFold2 [43]. The model aims to predict protein folding, dynamics,
and interactions, all of which are essential for understanding cellular processes and developing
therapeutic strategies. Multi-omics sequencing data integrates various biological layers and enables
the analysis of more complex and comprehensive downstream tasks. Models like Geneformer [60],
scFoundation [61], AlphaFold3 [44], and scGPT [62] is at the forefront of this domain, offering
powerful tools for integrating single-cell data and other omics modalities to gain a holistic view of
biological systems.
On the other hand, multi-domain approaches employ a diverse array of data modalities during
pretraining. BioT5+, for instance, utilizes molecular structures, textual descriptions, and molecular
naming conventions [47]. This approach enhances the model’s ability to perform a wider range
of downstream tasks. Med-Gemini extends this concept further by incorporating an even broader
spectrum of multimodal data, including 2D and 3D radiology images, histopathology patches,
ophthalmology images, dermatology images, and genetic data [48]. This extensive pretraining allows
Med-Gemini to address a vast array of biomedical tasks.
Furthermore, these models often function through an interactive interface, providing chatbot-like
functionalities for downstream tasks. Models like BioT5 [46] enable users to engage in intuitive
dialogue formats, posing inquiries in plain text and receiving detailed, contextually relevant responses.
This conversational ability allows chemical LLMs to perform complex tasks that require understanding
and reasoning beyond simple query responses. The majority of these models achieve their functionality
through two primary methods: fine-tuning on domain-specific data or directly interfacing with
existing APIs to provide responses. For example, GeneGPT [45] uses carefully designed prompts
to demonstrate to the LLM how to query APIs effectively, utilizing appropriate APIs during the
inference phase to respond to user requests. Alternatively, models like Med-Gemini can directly

[PAGE 6]
answer user queries through the model’s outputs, demonstrating versatility and a comprehensive
understanding of a wide range of topics [48].
2.4 Mapping of Genotypes and Phenotypes
Genotype-to-phenotype mapping is a traditional work in bioinformatics. In a statistical view,
GWAS [1, 2, 3] have played a dominant role in discovering potential relations between genotypes
and phenotypes on a population scale. It has tested hundreds of thousands of genetic variants across
human and other genomes to find those statistically associated traits or diseases, through which
gaining insight into a phenotype’s underlying biology, estimating its heritability, and discovering
genetic correlations. From a micro view, advancements in sequencing technologies, particularly
single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq), have significantly advanced our understanding. These techniques
expose the intricate dynamics of gene expression at the cellular level, unveiling the extensive
landscape of genotypes shaped by numerous factors [63]. In recent years, the utilization of machine
learning, particularly the adoption of self-supervised transformer models originally developed for
natural language processing (NLP), has demonstrated significant potential in the analysis of complex
biological datasets [60, 62].
At the cohort level, meta-analysis is an effective approach to integrate multiple association studies
of genes and phenotypes. Meta-analysis is a statistical tool used to combine results from different
studies on the same topic and quantitative synthesis of research findings. Meta-analysis enables the
identification of genuine associations between genes and phenotype [64]. Particularly for the studies
based on human populations, a comprehensive catalogue of all published GWAS and association
results have become publicly available, which provided resources for human-specific meta-analysis [4].
At the level of human cells, there is a principal goal of revealing the landscape of a combination
of genes that results in an extraordinarily diverse phenomenon. Phenomic databases [65], have
been collected as comprehensively as systematically assemblages of phenotype information.Freimer,
et. al.[ 66] has presented a computational integrated genetics framework designed to analyze and
interpret the high-dimensional landscape of genotypes and their associated phenotype. The study
introduces the use of self-supervised language models to simultaneously map the genotype-phenotype
landscape, proposing the concept of integrated genetics as an alternative to traditional forward and
reverse genetics. In this approach, phenotypes such as sex, age, anatomical tissue, and cell types are
integrated and learned alongside genotypic data obtained from scRNA-seq. This method deepens our
understanding of the biological context of gene expression and, ultimately, the genotype-phenotype
relationship.
2.5 Gene Networks and Knowledge Graphs
Whole genome sequencing [67, 68] and GWAS studies [69, 70]have already provided substantial
evidence for investigating disease-associated genes. Recent research suggests that genomics datasets
can be represented as gene networks, where the nodes symbolize genes, phenotypes, or proteins, and
the connections between the nodes indicate the relationships between these entities. Schlitt, et.al.
[71] propose a novel method for identifying functionally related genes by comparing neighbourhoods
within gene networks. This approach does not depend on gene sequence or protein structure
homologies and can be applied to any organism and a wide range of experimental datasets. Gene
networks enable researchers to seek additional evidence to cross-check their results using various
sources, e.g. enriching existing computational approaches such as linkage analysis and GWAS studies
by including the relationships identifications between genes from protein-protein interaction (PPI),

[PAGE 7]
gene expression, gene ontology and other domain knowledge [72]. HumanNet, HumanNet2, and
HumanNet3 constructed genome-scale functional networks for human genes using a variety of evidence
sources, including human mRNA co-expression, protein-protein interactions, protein complexes,
and comparative genomics datasets. In these networks, the edges may represent different types of
associations between genes, which can be mapped through both experimental and computational
methods [7, 73, 74].
At the same time, the development of knowledge bases and graphs has greatly enhanced performance
in fields like computer vision and natural language processing. Likewise, knowledge graphs have been
widely applied to specific biological tasks, such as cancer diagnosis [75, 76, 77]. Other studies take
advantage of the Gene Ontology (GO) knowledgebase to build the neural network architecture to
simulate the gene or protein reactions in the cells [76, 77]. Combining multiple bio-factors, biological
factor regulatory neural network (BFReg-NN) [78] aims at simulating the complex biological
processes in a cell system, understanding the functions of genes or proteins.
3 Method
3.1 Data
The datasets in genomics, proteomics, and medical genetics have experienced significant growth
in both scale and diversity. Our dataset-building attempt starts from the gene entities and their
textual descriptions maintained by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) [79].
Taking the 192064 individual gene items from NCBI as the entries, we then collected and screened
the data of related bio-factors from multiple datasets. Each of these datasets stands for a particular
level in the genomics system(Fig. 1).
Figure 1: Integration of multiple datasets.

[PAGE 8]
Data Collection
For the purpose of comprehensively incorporating and extracting the mapping between genes and
associated phenotype/diseases, multiple data sources were integrated into the training dataset of
this study. A major part of the dataset came from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man(OMIM)
database [80], which is a comprehensive and authoritative resource for understanding human genes
and their associated genetic disorders. OMIM keeps full-text information on all known Mendelian
disordersandover16,000genesandprovidesdetailedinformationonhumangenes, geneticphenotypes,
and the relationships between genes and phenotypes. Genes often cast influences on phenotypes
through gene products and a series of related complex biological pathway alterations [8]. Building on
this concept, we incorporated the information of gene products from UniPort [81], and their molecular
function information from NCBI. The extracted pairs of genes and associated phenotypes/diseases
were later verified and supplied through dbGaP [26] and DisGeNet [9]. In summary, from OMIM,
we collected the gene-phenotype pairs along with the relational graphs. A total of 4401 pairs of
phenotype and gene have been collected and verified with the dbGaP data. From UniPort, we
collected 1286 gene-protein pairs. From DisGeNet, we use the Relation Extraction (RE) samples
from the evidence terms. We integrated these multi-level genomics text data to serve our training
objective. All the mentioned data are examined and matched to the NCBI gene IDs and organized
accordingly.
Figure 2: Overview of multi-task multi-level formats of genomics text data. The training data set
can be built on intrinsic logic in multiple genomics datasets.
Construction of the Multi-task and Multi-level Genomics Training Corpus
Based on the intrinsic logic in multiple data sets, we extracted relevant bio-text and structured data
and formulated them into a multi-task multi-level genomics training corpus. The corpus is composed
of three training datasets, each containing different types of genomics knowledge context. The first
dataset is designed for the initial training stage, which follows the masked training manner, while

[PAGE 9]
the last two datasets are designed for conventional instruction fine-tuning.
The first part of the training set is based on instruction mask training. In this dataset, gene entities
data and phenotype/disease entities data from the dbGaP are organized into masked text data
(Fig. 3). The model is trained to follow the instructions to properly predict masked keywords. The
structure of the input text data follows the standard format of instruction fine-tuning guidance
provided by Llama models.
The second part of the training set focuses on excavated gene–protein relationships (Fig. 4). In this
dataset, named gene-protein contexts, we group the genomics knowledge based on three types of
relations:Gene-protein relationformulated the gene entity, the protein entity, the gene functions,
and the protein functions together. This format contains two sub-formats. The first sub-format
focuses on identifying the function of protein given its coding gene and gene function, while the
second sub-format focuses on identifying gene products.Protein-function inferringformulated
both protein entities and their functions. This sub-format focuses on training the model to identify
the protein entity based on relevant molecular functions.Gene-function inferringformulated the
gene entity and its functions. This sub-format focuses on training the model to identify the gene
entity based on the gene’s functions. Each type of the three relations is composed of text fields of
’Task Prompt’, ’Input’, and ’Output’.
The third part of the training set is based on the triple relationships between gene, protein, and
disease/phenotype entities (Fig. 5). This dataset is a gene-protein-phenotype/disease contexts dataset
and is structured based on the relations within this trinity: gene, protein, and disease/phenotype.
By considering the protein entities as a pivot, the dataset attempts to capture the complex relations
between these entities by examining their molecular and functional relations with the protein
entities, thereby, guiding the model to learn such relationships. To be noted that the three kinds
of contexts in this dataset contain both positive pairs and artificial negative pairs. Following the
aforementioned format, each context follows a formula of ’Task Prompt’, ’Input’, and ’Output’.
Protein-molecular featuresformulated the protein entity, the phenotype, and the molecular
relations, focusing on identifying the relationship between protein and phenotype/disease while
providing the underlying molecular mechanism.Protein-pathogenesis featuresformulated the
protein entity, the phenotype, and the pathogenesis relations, focusing on identifying the relationship
between protein and phenotype/disease by providing bio-pathway information.Gene-inheritance
featuresformulated the gene entity and inheritance facts. This format focuses on deciding the gene
entity given the relevant inherited facts of diseases.

[PAGE 10]
Figure 3: Tuning model at the first stage using instruction mask training data. The bio-text has been
fitted into the input format provided by the Llama model. The signs: ’### Instruction:, ’###
Input:’, and ’### Output:’, stand for the indicators inside the model input. The red words indicate
the replaceable gene entities and phenotype entities.

[PAGE 11]
Figure 4: Formatted genomics contexts of gene–protein. The red words indicate the replaceable gene
entities and phenotype entities. The examples in the ’Instances’ column show the available text which
can be used to fit into the position of red words in the Gene-Protein contexts.

[PAGE 12]
Figure 5: Formatted genomics contexts of gene-protein-disease/phenotype. The red words indicate
the replaceable gene entities and phenotype entities. The examples in the ’Instances’ column show
the available text which can be used to fit into the position of red words in the Gene-ProteinPhenotype/Disease contexts.

[PAGE 13]
3.2 Model
In this section, we introduce GP-GPT, an LLM-based paradigm developed to precisely map gene
and phenotype entities using bio-text linguistic knowledge. GP-GPT uses the Llama2 framework
to establish an autonomous LLM-based framework with a prompt question-and-answer format.
This model can automatically search for latent gene-phenotype associations, extract meaningful
relations, summarise bio-function descriptions, identify bio-factors, and visualize the embedding
of these bio-factors. The overview of the training input of the GP-GPT framework is shown in
(Fig. 2). We have constructed a training corpus with selected human genomics texts on multiple
bio-system levels following the conventions in section 3.1. The text data in this corpus reflects the
hidden connection between bio-factors from different levels and further organizes different types of
such relations into a similar format by choosing different instructions.
Parameter Efficient Fine-tuning
In this study, we utilize the parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques of the LLaMA model family
(Llama2, Llama3, Llama3.1) using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [39], and QLoRA [42] technique.
The objective is to adapt the Llama3 model for specific downstream tasks while minimizing the
number of trainable parameters and computational resources required. LoRA introduces a lowrank adaptation matrix into the transformer architecture, allowing efficient fine-tuning with fewer
parameters. In addition, QLoRA applies a quantized pre-trained language model into low-rank
adapters, significantly reducing memory usage to further finetune large language models. Both
techniques modify the original model minimally, making it computationally efficient and less prone
to overfitting, especially with limited data. In our study, we tested both LoRA and 8-bit QLoRA on
the Llama2 7B model and the Llama3.1 8B model. With no significant performance discrepancies
between the two techniques, we employed 8-bit QLoRA to achieve efficient fine-tuning. Additionally,
4-bit QloRA was used during the fine-tuning of the Llama3.1 70B model.
We built the fine-tuning models on the pre-trained Llama2 model 7B, Llama3.1 model 8B, and
eventuallyonthepre-trainedLlama3.170B.LoRAlayersareinsertedintothetransformerarchitecture
of such Llama models. These layers are designed to learn task-specific adaptations by introducing
low-rank matrices into the attention heads of the transformer model. By keeping the base model
parameters frozen, only the parameters of the LoRA layers are updated during the fine-tuning process.
This approach significantly reduces the number of trainable parameters compared to traditional
fine-tuning methods.
Training on Genomics Data
With the multi-task muti-modality genomics training corpus at hand, we follow the workflow of
parameter-efficient fine-tuning to train GP-GPT. As shown in (Fig. 6), the multi-level genomics
training data have been formatted into training contexts and fed into an instruction-fine-tuning
process based on Llama2. The whole instruction fine-tuning process can be viewed as two-stage
training. During the first stage, the training text data is from the first part of the training set, which
is prepared in the form of instruction mask prediction fine-tuning. In the second fine-tuning stage,
the training text data are drawn from the second part of the training set, which is designed for
supervised fine-tuning in a question-answer format.
Tokenization and Embedding:Models such as Llama, Llama2 and Llama3 utilize a characterbased approach to numerical tokenization, where each digit and special character is treated as a
separate token. This technique has been proven to be more effective in a variety of arithmetic tasks.

[PAGE 14]
Similarly, GP-GPT adopts this character-based tokenization method for bio-factor entities, including
gene IDs, protein names, and disease abbreviations. The original dictionary remains unaltered. We
assigned the <mask> token back to pre-trained Llama models during the first stage of fine-tuning,
in order to implement instruction mask fine-tuning. Specifically, the re-added <mask> token has
been assigned to the vocabulary dictionary at ID 35073.
Model architecture:GP-GPT employs the same architecture as Llama family models, with
a specific LoRA adaptor merged with the original model. We follow the configuration used in
Llama2(7B), Llama3.1(8B), and Llama3.1(70B). The vocabulary size of GP-GPT is 35, 073, the same
as the default configuration. GP-GPT model inherits M parameters from the original Llma2(7B)
and comprises an additional LoRA adaptor of M.
Fine-tuning:The entire instruction fine-tuning process can be considered as a two-stage training
approach. In the first stage, the training content is drawn from the initial segment of the training
set, which is prepared for fine-tuning through instruction mask prediction. In the second stage, the
training content is taken from the latter part of the training set, which is structured for supervised
fine-tuning using a question-answer format. GP-GPT can be fine-tuned on various downstream
tasks involving molecules, proteins, and text. In both stages, to bridge the gap between pre-training
and fine-tuning stages and unify different genomic downstream tasks, we employ a prompt-based
fine-tuning approach that converts various task formats into a sequence generation format [82, 83].
Figure 6: Overview of GP-GPT’s training framework.

[PAGE 15]
3.3 Evaluation
This study is designed to uncover the relationship between genes and phenotypes/diseases and
their mutual mappings, by using linguistic information extracted from bio-text data. Therefore,
considering the nature of the generative language model, we designed the evaluation experiments
based on a question-answer paradigm. Besides validating the performance of the model, we are also
interested in exploring the efficiency of using LLMs to map gene entities and phenotype/disease
entities. We visualized a series of gene-phenotype embedding in the LLM’s encoding space to better
understand the potential of the genomics relation language model.
Information QA
The question-answer evaluation of gene-phenotype information in this study can be classified as
a form of internal validation. Although the gene-phenotype pairs used in testing were implicitly
represented in the training data, this evaluation method serves as an effective tool for assessing our
model.
Case studies:We first evaluate GP-GPT on the text generation task. The models were required to
answer the questions about gene and disease knowledge. The ’Gene disease association’ questions
from the QA database GeneTuring [84] have been used to test our model, and an expert evaluation
has been conducted by comparing the model-generated texts and golden standard answers.
QA evaluation:This module tests the ability of GP-GPT models to identify the gene-disease
association with generated text based on specific question-answer instruction. The ground truth
of gene-disease association was downloaded from OMIM. More than 1000 gene-disease pairs were
randomly selected and all genes associated with each disease were recorded. In the question-answering
tasks, a question was created by pasting “What are genes related to ” before the disease name and a
question mark after the disease name. To create sentence completion tasks, a question was created
by pasting “The name of the gene related to ” before the disease name and “ is” after the disease
name. The testing of disease-gene association was designed in the same style by reversing a question
and answer from the above case. The set of gene-disease-associated pairs was used as the gold
standard. To compare the model-generated answer with the gold standard, 4 metrics were applied.
BLEU has been used to directly compare the two texts. The specialized BLEU-1 is designed to
precisely measure the gene or disease, the shortest phrases which only contain the gene’s name or
disease’s name are used as references in BLEU-1 calculation, while the brevity penalty and n-gram
precision are neglected. The accuracy gene-phenotype (ACC.G-P) and the accuracy phenotype-gene
(ACC.P-G) are calculated by matching the exact gene or phenotype name in the generated sentence.
Note that for complex names, only the non-duplicated stem tokens in the names are considered.
We evaluate the GP-GPT against other 7 large language models. The setting of the same prompt
components has been used across all different models. The candidate LLM includes: original
Llama2(7B), Llama2(13B), Llama3(8B), Llama3.1(8B), Llama3.1(70B), and the Bio-GPT [53], and
the GPT-4 model [11]. Our evaluation of GP-GPT is more rigorous than the evaluation of LLMs
and the GPT models in genomics [84], which minimized manual involvement and emphasized both
exact matches and partial correctness.
Genomics Relation Determination
To evaluate the model’s understanding of the relation between genes and phenotype/diseases, the
well-established relation determination task has been applied to directly test the model’s performance.

[PAGE 16]
The relation determination task was formulated as a text generation task with the proper questionanswer prompt. The relation determination prompt is composed of instruction and text, models
are asked to generate answers in yes/no based on the text. We use the test set from TBGA [32]
data. We screened the testing data by checking the gene-disease pairs with their corresponding pairs
in DisGeNet data, to ensure the knowledge correctness and testing effectiveness. We tested the
GP-GPT with other large language models, for the local running models, the results were collected in
a ’mixed-prompt’ strategy. Thus, for GP-GPT, Llama2, Llama3, Llama3.1, and Bio-GPT, each single
question-answer testing data is formulated with multiple prompts. During the results collection, the
best answer was selected as the final output of the model for further metric calculations. But for
commercial large language models like GPT-4, only one kind of prompt was tested due to its cost.
Bio-factors Embeddings
Considering the gene entities and phenotype/disease entities as two kinds of bio-factors, we report
the results for the soundness of the implementation of the LLM in the representation of bio-factors.
To this end, we explored the mapping of genes and phenotype/disease in the embedding space of
a large language model. By composing the summaries of gene entities and disease entities into
sentences, we obtained the sentence embeddings of the bio-factors inside the model. The observations
are intended to monitor the static embedding maps of the entities both in zero-shot mode and in a
fine-tuned model. In zero-shot mode, the latent embedding was extracted from the outputs of the
hidden layers. In fine-tuning models, the sentence embedding was comprised of the model’s original
layer outputs and the LoRA module’s modifications. UMAP has been applied for the visualization
of the embedding of entities.
4 Results
4.1 Dataset and Model Setting
We collected a total of 2,457,469 pieces of stage 1 genomics contextual data (1021 MiB) and 546,926
pieces of stage 2 genomics contextual data (308 MiB) for model training, out of which 10,000
randomly selected texts from each data set have been set aside as validation dataset. Both the
training dataset and validation dataset are balanced in terms of the multi-level multi-task formats
mentioned in 3.1. The model architecture is the same as the original Llama models: Llama2(7B),
Llama3.1(8B), and Llama3.1(70B). With Q-LoRA modules added to Llama2(7B) and Llama3.1(8B)
models at 8-bit, and to Llama3.1(70B) model at 4-bit. We fine-tune the model specifically focusing on
optimizing a smaller set of trainable parameters (overall at 7.49 percent compared to original models),
making the process faster and less resource-intensive. The learning rate was set to 1.4e-05, and the
batch size wa set to 32. As a result, we obtained the genomics-specific fine-tuned large language
models with different sizes: GP-GPT small (from Llama2 7B), GP-GPT base (from Llama3.1 8B),
and GP-GPT large (from Llama3.1 70B). In the final training stage (stage 2), an early stop have
been placed at the 2.75 epochs for GP-GPT small and GP-GPT base, and the early stop at 1.25
epochs for GP-GPT large.
4.2 Experiments
Genetic Medical QA
The model can generate reliable responses to gene-disease information queries. We provided four
randomly selected cases from four different questions. Upon comparing the model-generated answers

[PAGE 17]
with the ground truth of gene-phenotype knowledge, experts can confirm the fluency and reasoning
of the model’s responses (Fig. 7). The model’s performance fluctuates depending on the questions.
We showed both the high-quantity cases and the fewer ones for comparison. In the high-quantity
cases, the GP-GPT models successfully predict the correct gene names. Although in the worst cases,
the model fails to recall the mapping genes, the answer correctly recognises the disease entity and
delivers paragraphs with plausible reasoning.
Figure 7: Examples of gene-phenotype mapping task on questions-answers by GP-GPT(base).
(a), high quantity answers with the correct gene entity highlighted in green. (b) less desirable
answers with the misleading part marked in red. the yellow phrase denotes the knowledge
which not related to the question.
We gather 10 models to evaluate the performance of the proposed GP-GPT. The comparison results
are summarized in Table. 1. For GP-GPT with different sizes, their performances were tested
on the four pre-defined metrics: BLEU, BLEU-1, gene-phenotype accuracy, and phenotype-gene
accuracy. The results show that the large GP-GPT achieved the best performance on BLEU-1 and
gene-phenotype/disease information recalling. When compared to commercial LLM like ChatGPT-4,

[PAGE 18]
GP-GPT large also demonstrates comparable performance in phenotype/disease-gene information
recalling, considering their contrast in model sizes. The BLEU-1 score directly indicated the
ability of a model to find correctly related gene entities by a given phenotype/disease or vice versa.
These results suggest the outstanding characteristic of the GP-GPT large model in understanding
domain-specific problems. While all other fine-tuned models show an adaptive ability to recall the
genomics information and generate answers to the medical genetics questions, the GP-GPT base has
comparable scores against other candidate models with relatively fewer parameters.
Model BLEU BLEU-1 Acc.(G-P) Acc.(P-G)
Llama2(7B) 0.315 0.048 0.267 0.785
Llama2(13B) 0.260 0.053 0.288 0.790
Llama3(8B) 0.334 0.067 0.316 0.786
Llama3.1(8B) 0.318 0.072 0.322 0.793
Llama3.1(70B) 0.375 0.106 0.492 0.846
GPT-4 0.244 0.019 0.3920.877
BioGPT-large 0.298 0.013 0.270 0.825
GP-GPT(base)0.4040.102 0.375 0.847
GP-GPT(small) 0.325 0.075 0.285 0.796
GP-GPT(large) 0.3230.141 0.5330.837
Table 1: Results of information question answer and human evaluation.
Evaluation on Relation Determination
As for relation determination tasks, We gather 8 models to evaluate the performance of the proposed
GP-GPT. The comparison results are summarized in Table. 2. Based on the relation determination
task, we evaluate GP-GPT models and other models on the four metrics: Precision, Recall, Accuracy,
and F1 score. The results show that the fine-tuning procedures have gained the ability of GP-GPT
models in defining gene-phenotype relationships (based on F1 score). The overall best model is
GP-GPT(small), which is based on Llama2(7B). Considering the subpar performance of original
Llama3.1(8B) and Llama3.1(70B) on this special task, their corresponding fine-tuned version GPGPT(base) and GP-GPT(large) show significant improvements and achieved comparable scores
against the listed candidates. In summary, compared to the original models, All fine-tuned models
demonstrated an adaptive ability to determine the genomics relations in the form of generating
readable responses to medical genetics questions.
Visualization of Gene-Phenotype Embeddings
The Visualization of gene entities and phenotype/disease entities can be seen from two perspectives.
First, we show the latent text representations of the gene entities and the phenotype entities (Fig. 8).
By comparing the distributions of sentence embeddings in the two-dimensional UMAP space, the
efficiency of fine-tuning can be viewed as the distributions of gene entity embeddings and phenotype
entity embeddings. In the plot, the colors indicate the IDs of the corresponding gene-disease pairs.
By comparing the gene embedding plots and disease embedding plots, the embeddings from the
fine-tuned model show a noticeable spreading distribution pattern, especially for diseases. Second, in
Figure 9 (Fig. 9) and Figure 10 (Fig. 10), labelled by the related tissue, we probed and showed the
embeddings of entities from different layers of the model in the two-dimensional UMAP space. The

[TABLE page=18 index=1]
Columns: Model | BLEU | BLEU-1 | Acc.(G-P) | Acc.(P-G)
Row 1: Model: Llama2(7B) | BLEU: 0.315 | BLEU-1: 0.048 | Acc.(G-P): 0.267 | Acc.(P-G): 0.785
Row 2: Model: Llama2(13B) | BLEU: 0.26 | BLEU-1: 0.053 | Acc.(G-P): 0.288 | Acc.(P-G): 0.79
Row 3: Model: Llama3(8B) | BLEU: 0.334 | BLEU-1: 0.067 | Acc.(G-P): 0.316 | Acc.(P-G): 0.786
Row 4: Model: Llama3.1(8B) | BLEU: 0.318 | BLEU-1: 0.072 | Acc.(G-P): 0.322 | Acc.(P-G): 0.793
Row 5: Model: Llama3.1(70B) | BLEU: 0.375 | BLEU-1: 0.106 | Acc.(G-P): 0.492 | Acc.(P-G): 0.846
Row 6: Model: GPT-4 | BLEU: 0.244 | BLEU-1: 0.019 | Acc.(G-P): 0.392 | Acc.(P-G): 0.877
Row 7: Model: BioGPT-large | BLEU: 0.298 | BLEU-1: 0.013 | Acc.(G-P): 0.27 | Acc.(P-G): 0.825
Row 8: Model: GP-GPT(base) | BLEU: 0.404 | BLEU-1: 0.102 | Acc.(G-P): 0.375 | Acc.(P-G): 0.847
Row 9: Model: GP-GPT(small) | BLEU: 0.325 | BLEU-1: 0.075 | Acc.(G-P): 0.285 | Acc.(P-G): 0.796
Row 10: Model: GP-GPT(large) | BLEU: 0.323 | BLEU-1: 0.141 | Acc.(G-P): 0.533 | Acc.(P-G): 0.837
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 19]
,
Model Precision Recall Accuracy F1
Llama2(7B) 0.303 0.960 0.310 0.461
Llama2(13B) 0.301 0.969 0.302 0.469
Llama3(8B) 0.311 0.967 0.307 0.463
Llama3.1(8B) 0.315 0.288 0.305 0.316
Llama3.1(70B) 0.312 0.850 0.304 0.456
GPT-4 0.276 0.686 0.259 0.394
Bio-bert 0.335 0.530 0.306 0.411
GP-GPT(base) 0.318 0.537 0.308 0.400
GP-GPT(small) 0.325 0.869 0.314 0.473
GP-GPT(large) 0.313 0.860 0.307 0.459
Table 2: Evaluation on relation determination of gene-phenotype mapping.
results suggest the representation changing of genes and diseases inside the models. Based on the
comparison of GP-GPT(base) and the original pre-trained Llama model, it shows that the fine-tuning
process leads to a better representation, e.g., the clustering process of neuron cell-related genes
and diseases. The visualization results show that, with the training on multi-level bio-factors’ data,
the framework of instruction fine-tuning can effectively capture better representations of genetics
biomedical entities and efficiently encode their relations.

[TABLE page=19 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Model | Precision | Recall | Accuracy | F1
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Model: Llama2(7B) | Precision: 0.303 | Recall: 0.96 | Accuracy: 0.31 | F1: 0.461
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Model: Llama2(13B) | Precision: 0.301 | Recall: 0.969 | Accuracy: 0.302 | F1: 0.469
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Model: Llama3(8B) | Precision: 0.311 | Recall: 0.967 | Accuracy: 0.307 | F1: 0.463
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Model: Llama3.1(8B) | Precision: 0.315 | Recall: 0.288 | Accuracy: 0.305 | F1: 0.316
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: , | Model: Llama3.1(70B) | Precision: 0.312 | Recall: 0.85 | Accuracy: 0.304 | F1: 0.456
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Model: GPT-4 | Precision: 0.276 | Recall: 0.686 | Accuracy: 0.259 | F1: 0.394
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Model: Bio-bert | Precision: 0.335 | Recall: 0.53 | Accuracy: 0.306 | F1: 0.411
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Model: GP-GPT(base) | Precision: 0.318 | Recall: 0.537 | Accuracy: 0.308 | F1: 0.4
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Model: GP-GPT(small) | Precision: 0.325 | Recall: 0.869 | Accuracy: 0.314 | F1: 0.473
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Model: GP-GPT(large) | Precision: 0.313 | Recall: 0.86 | Accuracy: 0.307 | F1: 0.459
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 20]
Figure 8: Latent text representations of gene entity and phenotype entity. Representations extracted
by sentence embedding of the 30th layer from the model(GP-GPT base). Colors indicate the IDs of
gene-phenotype pairs.

[PAGE 21]
Figure 9: Latent text representations of gene entities and phenotype entities in GP-GPT(base). The
subplots show the embedding implant in the 2D UMAP space, for layer 10th, layer 20th, and layer
30th. Blue circles indicate the identified clusters of neuron-related tissues.

[PAGE 22]
Figure 10: Comparable zero-shot embedding of text representations of gene entities and phenotype
entities in original Llama3.1(8B). The subplots show the embedding implant in the 2D UMAP space,
for layer 10th, layer 20th, and layer 30th. Blue circles indicate the identified clusters of neuron-related
tissues.

[PAGE 23]
5 Discussions and Conclusion
5.1 Limitations
Our study faces a few limitations. Considering the current research trends and inherent issues in
the realms of genetics, genomics, transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, and the general biomedical
domain, the primary challenges of large language models lie in the following key areas.
Dataset Expansion
The data used in this study covers multiple data sources, including dbGaP, UniPort, DisGeNet,
NCBI, and OMIM. Among these datasets, the employed bio-text data are mainly based on OMIM.
Although the training corpus is composed of 4401 pairs of phenotype and gene, the construction of
training contextual data is heavily dependent on high-quality textual data, which is lacking for most
genes and diseases. With this limitation of data sources, there is demand of generating more reliable
genomics textual data from other structure dataset. Inspired by the network-based disease gene
prediction research, using the network data of protein-protein interaction (PPI), gene expression,
gene ontology, and other domain knowledge to generate large relational-genomics text data is an
available way. Based on conventional relationships often observed in bio-networks, e.g. dominating,
inhibiting, and promoting, the relation network of bio-factors can provide rich text data following a
well-designed graph-to-text interpreting system. To be noted that, such systems are usually based
on LLMs as well [85, 86, 87].
Tokenization of Genomics Entities
Tokenization is one of the essential steps in the success of the training language model. To simplify
the model training, we adopt the character-based tokenization method from the original Llama2, and
Llama3 for all the genomics entities. One reason for this is that the model is only focusing on the
name-entities features and relation description, which both are based on natural languages. Another
reason is that Llama2 and Llama3 employ a character-based method for the numerical tokenization
approach, which has been shown to be more effective across various arithmetic tasks. In practice,
these tokenizers work well for the current stage of GP-GPT. However, a from-scratch pre-training
can be necessary for a better representation of genetics, genomics, and other levels of bio-factors,
especially when more features from the sequence are involved. Previous works [43, 44, 46] have
provided available instances for bioinformatics costumed tokenizor. Due to the computation cost, we
decide to put such endeavours into our further improvement of GP-GPT.
Model Performance and Evaluation
In terms of question-answer text synthesis, the model occasionally exhibits semantic repetition at
the document level, tends to lose coherence over the questions, and sometimes includes non-sequitur
sentences or paragraphs. Our experiments only include the instruction fine-tuning following the
convention of the generative language model and do not include self-regression architectures or
other denoising training objectives. Lack of direct training on fill-in-the-blank tasks or considering
bi-directionality self-regression leads to potentially worse performance on parsing a long passage and
then generating a very short answer. In practice, that could be observed at relatively low precision
metrics for all LLMs tested in this study, compared with other knowledge graph-based models.
Furthermore, the evaluation methods for such genomics language models are still underdeveloped.
The direct issue to this end is that the missing of standard benchmarks in this area. On one hand,

[PAGE 24]
traditional metrics such as BLEU [88], and ROUGE [89] do not fit the defined research aim in this
study, thus the metrics lack the necessary focus on certain bio-factor entities. In this study, we use
modified BLEU which adjusts the weighting for genomics keywords to mediate this issue. Both
the original BLEU score and modified BLEU score are reported for GP-GPT, leading to a more
comprehensive estate of model performance. On the other hand, a stand-alone test set for evaluation
becomes a problem for this study. That is due to the aim of the model being to build a fundamental
language AI system to interpret real-world genetic medical relations. Our solution in the study is
based on internal validation on a random select genomics relationship which has been verified by
biological experiments.
5.2 Future Perspectives
Multi-Modality
Our proposed large language models are not grounded in incorporating other domains of data, such as
biological sequence data and medical images. The wide applicability of transformer architecture [90]
facilitates modality fusion. Recent research in computer vision and NLP also demonstrates significant
benefits in combining multiple modalities to achieve application success [91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96].
Domain-specific models are natural platforms for incorporating data from other modality to improve
and scale practical usability [97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106].
Bio-sequence data counts for the most dominant part of all available data in bioinformatics studies.
One of the efficient ways to combine the bio-sequence data and LLMs is utilizing the parallel
architecture to place both the sequence-specific model and language-specific model [107]. Using
specific tokenizers to encode particular sequence features is another practical method [108]. In
future versions of GP-GPT, the sequence data from DNA sequences, gene variances, and gene
products(small-RNA, protein) will be included in the framework.
Imaging genetics offers the possibility of building connections between genetics insights into the
biology of complex diseases and functions [109, 110, 111]. LLM systems can largely benefit the
representation of gene variants and candidate phenotypes, thus providing a qualitative description of
domain knowledge. By utilizing the image encoder, bio-factor entity encoder, and variants encoder,
this framework can capture the intricate interplay in semantic embedding space, which leads to more
comprehensive association identifications.
Dementia-related Genotype-Phenotype Associations Identification
Dementia is a major public health challenge due to its profound impact on individuals, families, and
healthcare systems globally. Dementia’s etiology is complex, involving a combination of genetic and
environmental factors [112]. Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) [113, 114, 115], the most common form of
dementia, is characterized by the accumulation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the
brain. Over the past few decades, genetics has become increasingly pivotal in AD study [116, 117],
starting with the discovery of rare mutations in the APP (amyloid precursor protein), PSEN1
(presenilin-1), and PSEN2 (presenilin-2) genes, which are linked to early-onset autosomal dominant
forms of the disease. The association of the APOE (apolipoprotein E)ϵ-4 allele with sporadic or lateonset AD has further highlighted the genetic underpinnings of the disease. Phenotypic heterogeneity,
or variability in disease presentation, is also evident in AD [112]. For instance, certain PSEN1
mutations are associated with distinct clinical features such as spastic paraparesis and degeneration
of the corticospinal tract [118, 119]. Similarly, APP mutations can lead to lobar haemorrhages
associated with cerebral Aβ40 angiopathy, which showcases the diverse manifestations of AD [120].

[PAGE 25]
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is another form of progressive dementia marked by the presence of
Lewy bodies—abnormal protein deposits in the brain [121]. These deposits disrupt brain chemistry,
leading to memory, cognitive, movement, behavioural, and mood disturbances. DLB shares clinical
features with both AD and Parkinson’s disease, complicating its diagnosis. Genetic research has
identified several mutations associated with Lewy body diseases, including mutations in LRRK2,
SNCA, PLA2G6, and C19ORF12, as well as GBA variants [122], which significantly increase the
risk of developing these conditions. Genes and their variants are not isolated entities; instead, they
function within broader pathways and networks, leading to a range of downstream effects across
multiple biological levels, including the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome. For instance,
previous studies have shown that the pro-apoptotic gene FASTKD2 is associated with better episodic
memory performance. This association relates to a memory-associated SNP linked to lower FASTKD2
mRNA expression (transcript), reduced cerebrospinal fluid levels of fas-mediated apoptotic factors
(protein), and greater hippocampal volume and gray matter density (brain anatomy) [123]. Therefore,
studying genotype-phenotype associations is essential for advancing research, improving diagnosis,
and developing targeted therapies that consider the individual variability in patients. GP-GPT
shows significant promise in addressing this issue. It excels at genotype-phenotype mapping, enabling
the analysis of genetic impacts on various phenotypes. By integrating genotype and phenotype
into a unified embedding space, GP-GPT positions genes with similar pathological roles close to
one another. This approach offers a novel method for identifying new candidate high-risk genes by
exploring the continuous embedding space around known pathogenic genes.
5.3 Conclusion
In this study, we introduce GP-GPT, a specialized large language model framework for geneticphenotype knowledge representation and analysis, which incorporates multiple gene, protein, and
biomedical data sources. The training dataset integrates genomics and genetic medical data from
key databases such as OMIM, DisGeNET, UniProt, and dbGaP to compile a consortium of both
structured and unstructured data, and organizes this raw data into textual corpus. Based on the
Llama model family, we developed genomic-specific versions of GP-GPT in three sizes: GP-GPT
Small (based on Llama 2 7B), GP-GPT Base (based on Llama 3 8B), and GP-GPT Large (based
on Llama3 70B). We evaluated the model on multiple tasks, including genetic medical question
answering and genomic relationship determination. In such tasks, GP-GPT outperformed current
state-of-the-art large language models, including Llama2/3 and GPT-4. Additionally, a comparison of
the GP-GPT variants (Small, Base, Large) revealed a significant impact of model size on fine-tuning
outcomes.
Overall, the fine-tuned models with different configurations(GP-GPT base, GP-GPT small, and
GP-GPT large) all delivered superior performance on genomics QA tasks, providing more reliable
answers to genetic medical questions and more accurate entity identifications. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that fine-tuning large language models on genomics-specific training data leads to
improved hidden representations of genetic medical entities. This indicates that the model has
gained a deeper understanding of the complex relationships among bio-factor entities. For instance,
compared to the original pre-trained model, when focusing on the neuron-brain-related genes and
diseases, clear embedding clusters emerged for GP-GPT models’ entity embeddings. GP-GPT
consistently offers an effective framework for studying the representations of genetic medical concepts
and genomic bio-factors.
As the first large language model to describe the relationships among multi-level bio-factors, GP-GPT
models show potential for further refinement and the capacity to become a foundational model in

[PAGE 26]
genomics and medical genetics. One key application is AI-assisted genetic disease prediction. By
integrating extensive knowledge, the model can serve as an AI assistant in diagnosing gene-related
diseases in individual clinical cases. Additionally, in large-scale studies of associations between
diseases and genetic variants, the reasoning behind results often depends on carefully designed
experiments and rigorous statistical corrections in large cohorts. GP-GPT can enhance this process
by offering strong probabilistic priors, particularly in cases of small sample sizes and extreme data
imbalances.
6 Model and Data A vailability
The model in this work is openly available athttps://huggingface.co/IanL10/GP-GPT.
Processed datasets for training is openly available at:https://huggingface.co/datasets/IanL10/
Genomic-text.
References
[1] Peter M Visscher, Naomi R Wray, Qian Zhang, Pamela Sklar, Mark I McCarthy, Matthew A
Brown, and Jian Yang. 10 years of gwas discovery: biology, function, and translation.The
American Journal of Human Genetics, 101(1):5–22, 2017.
[2] Kyoko Watanabe, Sven Stringer, Oleksandr Frei, Maša Umićević Mirkov, Christiaan de Leeuw,
Tinca JC Polderman, Sophie van der Sluis, Ole A Andreassen, Benjamin M Neale, and Danielle
Posthuma. A global overview of pleiotropy and genetic architecture in complex traits.Nature
genetics, 51(9):1339–1348, 2019.
[3] Philip R Jansen, Kyoko Watanabe, Sven Stringer, Nathan Skene, Julien Bryois, Anke R
Hammerschlag, Christiaan A de Leeuw, Jeroen S Benjamins, Ana B Muñoz-Manchado, Mats
Nagel, et al. Genome-wide analysis of insomnia in 1,331,010 individuals identifies new risk loci
and functional pathways.Nature genetics, 51(3):394–403, 2019.
[4] Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,
Heather Junkins, Aoife McMahon, Annalisa Milano, Joannella Morales, et al. The new nhgri-ebi
catalog of published genome-wide association studies (gwas catalog).Nucleic acids research,
45(D1):D896–D901, 2017.
[5] Josep F Abril and S Castellano Hereza. Genome annotation. Elsevier, 2019.
[6] Suzi A Aleksander, James Balhoff, Seth Carbon, J Michael Cherry, Harold J Drabkin, Dustin
Ebert, Marc Feuermann, Pascale Gaudet, Nomi L Harris, et al. The gene ontology knowledgebase in 2023.Genetics, 224(1):iyad031, 2023.
[7] Sohyun Hwang, Chan Yeong Kim, Sunmo Yang, Eiru Kim, Traver Hart, Edward M Marcotte,
and Insuk Lee. Humannet v2: human gene networks for disease research.Nucleic acids
research, 47(D1):D573–D580, 2019.
[8] Joanna S Amberger, Carol A Bocchini, François Schiettecatte, Alan F Scott, and Ada Hamosh.
Omim. org: Online mendelian inheritance in man (omim®), an online catalog of human genes
and genetic disorders.Nucleic acids research, 43(D1):D789–D798, 2015.

[TABLE page=26 index=1]
Columns: [4] | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,
Row 1: [4]: | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,: Heather Junkins, Aoife McMahon, Annalisa Milano, Joannella Morales, et al. The new nhgri-ebi
Row 2: [4]: | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,: catalog of published genome-wide association studies (gwas catalog). Nucleic acids research,
Row 3: [4]: | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,: 45(D1):D896–D901, 2017.
Row 4: [4]: [5] | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,: Josep F Abril and S Castellano Hereza. Genome annotation. Elsevier, 2019.
Row 5: [4]: [6] | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,: Suzi A Aleksander, James Balhoff, Seth Carbon, J Michael Cherry, Harold J Drabkin, Dustin
Row 6: [4]: | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,: Ebert, Marc Feuermann, Pascale Gaudet, Nomi L Harris, et al. The gene ontology knowledgeRow 7: [4]: | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,: base in 2023. Genetics, 224(1):iyad031, 2023.
Row 8: [4]: [7] | Jacqueline MacArthur, Emily Bowler, Maria Cerezo, Laurent Gil, Peggy Hall, Emma Hastings,: Sohyun Hwang, Chan Yeong Kim, Sunmo Yang, Eiru Kim, Traver Hart, Edward M Marcotte,
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 27]
[9] Janet Piñero, Juan Manuel Ramírez-Anguita, Josep Saüch-Pitarch, Francesco Ronzano, Emilio
Centeno, Ferran Sanz, and Laura I Furlong. The disgenet knowledge platform for disease
genomics: 2019 update.Nucleic acids research, 48(D1):D845–D855, 2020.
[10] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
text-to-text transformer.The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
[11] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4
technical report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[12] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open
foundation and fine-tuned chat models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[13] Yiheng Liu, Tianle Han, Siyuan Ma, Jiayue Zhang, Yuanyuan Yang, Jiaming Tian, Hao He,
Antong Li, Mengshen He, Zhengliang Liu, et al. Summary of chatgpt/gpt-4 research and
perspective towards the future of large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01852,
2023.
[14] Lin Zhao, Lu Zhang, Zihao Wu, Yuzhong Chen, Haixing Dai, Xiaowei Yu, Zhengliang Liu,
Tuo Zhang, Xintao Hu, Xi Jiang, et al. When brain-inspired ai meets agi.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.15935, 2023.
[15] Chong Ma, Zihao Wu, Jiaqi Wang, Shaochen Xu, Yaonai Wei, Zhengliang Liu, Fang Zeng,
Xi Jiang, Lei Guo, Xiaoyan Cai, et al. An iterative optimizing framework for radiology report
summarization with chatgpt.IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
[16] Haixing Dai, Zhengliang Liu, Wenxiong Liao, Xiaoke Huang, Zihao Wu, Lin Zhao, Wei Liu,
Ninghao Liu, Sheng Li, Dajiang Zhu, et al. Chataug: Leveraging chatgpt for text data
augmentation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13007, 2023.
[17] Zhengliang Liu, Yiwei Li, Peng Shu, Aoxiao Zhong, Longtao Yang, Chao Ju, Zihao Wu, Chong
Ma, Jie Luo, Cheng Chen, et al. Radiology-llama2: Best-in-class large language model for
radiology.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06419, 2023.
[18] Wenxiong Liao, Zhengliang Liu, Haixing Dai, Shaochen Xu, Zihao Wu, Yiyang Zhang, Xiaoke
Huang, Dajiang Zhu, Hongmin Cai, Quanzheng Li, et al. Differentiating chatgpt-generated
and human-written medical texts: quantitative study.JMIR Medical Education, 9(1):e48904,
2023.
[19] Zhengliang Liu, Xinyu He, Lei Liu, Tianming Liu, and Xiaoming Zhai. Context matters: A
strategy to pre-train language model for science education.arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12031,
2023.
[20] Kai Zhang, Jun Yu, Zhiling Yan, Yixin Liu, Eashan Adhikarla, Sunyang Fu, Xun Chen,
Chen Chen, Yuyin Zhou, Xiang Li, et al. Biomedgpt: a unified and generalist biomedical
generative pre-trained transformer for vision, language, and multimodal tasks.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.17100, 2023.
[21] Haixing Dai, Yiwei Li, Zhengliang Liu, Lin Zhao, Zihao Wu, Suhang Song, Ye Shen, Dajiang
Zhu, Xiang Li, Sheng Li, et al. Ad-autogpt: An autonomous gpt for alzheimer’s disease
infodemiology.arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10095, 2023.

[PAGE 28]
[22] Jason Holmes, Zhengliang Liu, Lian Zhang, Yuzhen Ding, Terence T Sio, Lisa A McGee,
Jonathan B Ashman, Xiang Li, Tianming Liu, Jiajian Shen, et al. Evaluating large language models on a highly-specialized topic, radiation oncology physics.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.01938, 2023.
[23] Saed Rezayi, Haixing Dai, Zhengliang Liu, Zihao Wu, Akarsh Hebbar, Andrew H Burns, Lin
Zhao, Dajiang Zhu, Quanzheng Li, Wei Liu, et al. Clinicalradiobert: Knowledge-infused few
shot learning for clinical notes named entity recognition. InMachine Learning in Medical
Imaging: 13th International Workshop, MLMI 2022, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2022,
Singapore, September 18, 2022, Proceedings, pages 269–278. Springer, 2022.
[24] Jiaqi Wang, Enze Shi, Sigang Yu, Zihao Wu, Chong Ma, Haixing Dai, Qiushi Yang, Yanqing
Kang, Jinru Wu, Huawen Hu, et al. Prompt engineering for healthcare: Methodologies and
applications.arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14670, 2023.
[25] Zhengliang Liu, Hanqi Jiang, Tianyang Zhong, Zihao Wu, Chong Ma, Yiwei Li, Xiaowei Yu,
Yutong Zhang, Yi Pan, Peng Shu, et al. Holistic evaluation of gpt-4v for biomedical imaging.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05256, 2023.
[26] Matthew D Mailman, Michael Feolo, Yumi Jin, Masato Kimura, Kimberly Tryka, Rinat
Bagoutdinov, Luning Hao, Anne Kiang, Justin Paschall, Lon Phan, et al. The ncbi dbgap
database of genotypes and phenotypes.Nature genetics, 39(10):1181–1186, 2007.
[27] Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel Hesslow,
Roman Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. Bloom: A
176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model. 2023.
[28] Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman,
Teven Le Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, et al. Crosslingual generalization through multitask finetuning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01786, 2022.
[29] Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra
Cojocaru, MerouaneDebbah, EtienneGoffinet, DanielHeslow, JulienLaunay, QuentinMalartic,
et al. Falcon-40b: an open large language model with state-of-the-art performance. 2023.URL
https://falconllm. tii. ae, 2023.
[30] Jaskaran Kaur Gill, Madhu Chetty, Suryani Lim, and Jennifer Hallinan. Large language model
based framework for automated extraction of genetic interactions from unstructured data.Plos
one, 19(5):e0303231, 2024.
[31] Giulia Babbi, Pier Luigi Martelli, Giuseppe Profiti, Samuele Bovo, Castrense Savojardo, and
Rita Casadio. edgar: a database of disease-gene associations with annotated relationships
among genes.BMC genomics, 18:25–34, 2017.
[32] Stefano Marchesin and Gianmaria Silvello. Tbga: a large-scale gene-disease association dataset
for biomedical relation extraction.BMC bioinformatics, 23(1):111, 2022.
[33] J-D Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. Genia corpus—a semantically
annotated corpus for bio-textmining.Bioinformatics, 19(suppl_1):i180–i182, 2003.
[34] Sampo Pyysalo, Filip Ginter, Juho Heimonen, Jari Björne, Jorma Boberg, Jouni Järvinen,
and Tapio Salakoski. Bioinfer: a corpus for information extraction in the biomedical domain.
BMC bioinformatics, 8:1–24, 2007.

[TABLE page=28 index=1]
Columns: [29] | Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra
Row 1: [29]: | Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra: Cojocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic,
Row 2: [29]: | Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra: et al. Falcon-40b: an open large language model with state-of-the-art performance. 2023. URL
Row 3: [29]: | Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra: https://falconllm. tii. ae, 2023.
Row 4: [29]: [30] | Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra: Jaskaran Kaur Gill, Madhu Chetty, Suryani Lim, and Jennifer Hallinan. Large language model
Row 5: [29]: | Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra: based framework for automated extraction of genetic interactions from unstructured data. Plos
Row 6: [29]: | Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra: one, 19(5):e0303231, 2024.
Row 7: [29]: [31] | Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra: Giulia Babbi, Pier Luigi Martelli, Giuseppe Profiti, Samuele Bovo, Castrense Savojardo, and
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 29]
[35] Martin Krallinger, Florian Leitner, Carlos Rodriguez-Penagos, and Alfonso Valencia. Overview
of the protein-protein interaction annotation extraction task of biocreative ii.Genome biology,
9:1–19, 2008.
[36] Ling Luo, Po-Ting Lai, Chih-Hsuan Wei, Cecilia N Arighi, and Zhiyong Lu. Biored: a rich
biomedical relation extraction dataset.Briefings in Bioinformatics, 23(5):bbac282, 2022.
[37] Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Christopher Potts, and Noah D Goodman. Interpretability at
scale: Identifying causal mechanisms in alpaca.arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08809, 2023.
[38] Stanford CRFM — crfm.stanford.edu. https://crfm.stanford.edu/2023/03/13/alpaca.
html. [Accessed 09-Jun-2023].
[39] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
[40] Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe,
Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning
for nlp. InInternational conference on machine learning, pages 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
[41] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models
to follow instructions with human feedback.arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.
[42] Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient
finetuning of quantized llms.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[43] Patrick Bryant, Gabriele Pozzati, and Arne Elofsson. Improved prediction of protein-protein
interactions using alphafold2.Nature communications, 13(1):1265, 2022.
[44] Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander Pritzel,
Olaf Ronneberger, Lindsay Willmore, Andrew J Ballard, Joshua Bambrick, et al. Accurate
structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3.Nature, pages 1–3, 2024.
[45] Qiao Jin, Yifan Yang, Qingyu Chen, and Zhiyong Lu. Genegpt: Augmenting large language
models with domain tools for improved access to biomedical information.Bioinformatics,
40(2):btae075, 2024.
[46] Qizhi Pei, Wei Zhang, Jinhua Zhu, Kehan Wu, Kaiyuan Gao, Lijun Wu, Yingce Xia, and Rui
Yan. Biot5: Enriching cross-modal integration in biology with chemical knowledge and natural
language associations.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07276, 2023.
[47] Qizhi Pei, Lijun Wu, Kaiyuan Gao, Xiaozhuan Liang, Yin Fang, Jinhua Zhu, Shufang Xie,
Tao Qin, and Rui Yan. Biot5+: Towards generalized biological understanding with iupac
integration and multi-task tuning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17810, 2024.
[48] Lin Yang, Shawn Xu, Andrew Sellergren, Timo Kohlberger, Yuchen Zhou, Ira Ktena, Atilla
Kiraly, Faruk Ahmed, Farhad Hormozdiari, Tiam Jaroensri, et al. Advancing multimodal
medical capabilities of gemini.arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03162, 2024.
[49] Zhenyu Bi, Sajib Acharjee Dip, Daniel Hajialigol, Sindhura Kommu, Hanwen Liu, Meng Lu,
and Xuan Wang. Ai for biomedicine in the era of large language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.15673, 2024.

[PAGE 30]
[50] Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. Scibert: A pretrained language model for scientific
text.arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10676, 2019.
[51] Emily Alsentzer, John R Murphy, Willie Boag, Wei-Hung Weng, Di Jin, Tristan Naumann,
and Matthew McDermott. Publicly available clinical bert embeddings.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.03323, 2019.
[52] Long N Phan, James T Anibal, Hieu Tran, Shaurya Chanana, Erol Bahadroglu, Alec Peltekian,
and Grégoire Altan-Bonnet. Scifive: a text-to-text transformer model for biomedical literature.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03598, 2021.
[53] Renqian Luo, Liai Sun, Yingce Xia, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Tie-Yan
Liu. Biogpt: generative pre-trained transformer for biomedical text generation and mining.
Briefings in bioinformatics, 23(6):bbac409, 2022.
[54] Žiga Avsec, Vikram Agarwal, Daniel Visentin, Joseph R Ledsam, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska,
Kyle R Taylor, Yannis Assael, John Jumper, Pushmeet Kohli, and David R Kelley. Effective
gene expression prediction from sequence by integrating long-range interactions.Nature
methods, 18(10):1196–1203, 2021.
[55] Hugo Dalla-Torre, Liam Gonzalez, Javier Mendoza-Revilla, Nicolas Lopez Carranza, Adam Henryk Grzywaczewski, Francesco Oteri, Christian Dallago, Evan Trop, Bernardo P de Almeida,
Hassan Sirelkhatim, et al. The nucleotide transformer: Building and evaluating robust
foundation models for human genomics.BioRxiv, pages 2023–01, 2023.
[56] Maxim Zvyagin, Alexander Brace, Kyle Hippe, Yuntian Deng, Bin Zhang, Cindy Orozco
Bohorquez, Austin Clyde, Bharat Kale, Danilo Perez-Rivera, Heng Ma, et al. Genslms:
Genome-scale language models reveal sars-cov-2 evolutionary dynamics.The International
Journal of High Performance Computing Applications, 37(6):683–705, 2023.
[57] E Nguyen, M Poli, M Faizi, A Thomas, C Birch-Sykes, M Wornow, A Patel, C Rabideau,
S Massaroli, Y Bengio, et al. Hyenadna: long-range genomic sequence modeling at single
nucleotide resolution. arxiv; 2023.arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15794.
[58] Manato Akiyama and Yasubumi Sakakibara. Informative rna base embedding for rna structural
alignment and clustering by deep representation learning.NAR genomics and bioinformatics,
4(1):lqac012, 2022.
[59] Jiayang Chen, Zhihang Hu, Siqi Sun, Qingxiong Tan, Yixuan Wang, Qinze Yu, Licheng
Zong, Liang Hong, Jin Xiao, Tao Shen, et al. Interpretable rna foundation model from
unannotated data for highly accurate rna structure and function predictions.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.00300, 2022.
[60] Christina V Theodoris, Ling Xiao, Anant Chopra, Mark D Chaffin, Zeina R Al Sayed,
Matthew C Hill, Helene Mantineo, Elizabeth M Brydon, Zexian Zeng, X Shirley Liu, et al.
Transfer learning enables predictions in network biology.Nature, 618(7965):616–624, 2023.
[61] Minsheng Hao, Jing Gong, Xin Zeng, Chiming Liu, Yucheng Guo, Xingyi Cheng, Taifeng
Wang, Jianzhu Ma, Xuegong Zhang, and Le Song. Large-scale foundation model on single-cell
transcriptomics.Nature Methods, pages 1–11, 2024.
[62] Haotian Cui, Chloe Wang, Hassaan Maan, Kuan Pang, Fengning Luo, Nan Duan, and Bo Wang.
scgpt: toward building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using generative ai.Nature
Methods, pages 1–11, 2024.

[PAGE 31]
[63] Thomas M Norman, Max A Horlbeck, Joseph M Replogle, Alex Y Ge, Albert Xu, Marco
Jost, Luke A Gilbert, and Jonathan S Weissman. Exploring genetic interaction manifolds
constructed from rich single-cell phenotypes.Science, 365(6455):786–793, 2019.
[64] Thomas A Trikalinos, Georgia Salanti, Elias Zintzaras, and John PA Ioannidis. Meta-analysis
methods.Advances in genetics, 60:311–334, 2008.
[65] Nelson Freimer and Chiara Sabatti. The human phenome project.Nature genetics, 34(1):15–21,
2003.
[66] Farhan Khodaee, Rohola Zandie, and Elazer R Edelman. Multimodal learning for mapping
the genotype-phenotype dynamics.Research Square, 2024.
[67] Ara Cho, Jung Eun Shim, Eiru Kim, Fran Supek, Ben Lehner, and Insuk Lee. Muffinn: cancer
gene discovery via network analysis of somatic mutation data.Genome biology, 17:1–16, 2016.
[68] Heiko Horn, Michael S Lawrence, Candace R Chouinard, Yashaswi Shrestha, Jessica Xin Hu,
Elizabeth Worstell, Emily Shea, Nina Ilic, Eejung Kim, Atanas Kamburov, et al. Netsig:
network-based discovery from cancer genomes.Nature methods, 15(1):61–66, 2018.
[69] Casey S Greene, Arjun Krishnan, Aaron K Wong, Emanuela Ricciotti, Rene A Zelaya, Daniel S
Himmelstein, Ran Zhang, Boris M Hartmann, Elena Zaslavsky, Stuart C Sealfon, et al.
Understanding multicellular function and disease with human tissue-specific networks.Nature
genetics, 47(6):569–576, 2015.
[70] Jung Eun Shim, Changbae Bang, Sunmo Yang, Tak Lee, Sohyun Hwang, Chan Yeong Kim,
U Martin Singh-Blom, Edward M Marcotte, and Insuk Lee. Gwab: a web server for the
network-based boosting of human genome-wide association data.Nucleic acids research,
45(W1):W154–W161, 2017.
[71] Thomas Schlitt, Kimmo Palin, Johan Rung, Sabine Dietmann, Michael Lappe, Esko Ukkonen,
and Alvis Brazma. From gene networks to gene function.Genome research, 13(12):2568–2576,
2003.
[72] Sezin Kircali Ata, Min Wu, Yuan Fang, Le Ou-Yang, Chee Keong Kwoh, and Xiao-Li Li. Recent
advances in network-based methods for disease gene prediction.Briefings in bioinformatics,
22(4):bbaa303, 2021.
[73] Audrius Kulikajevas, Rytis Maskeliunas, Robertas Damasevicius, and Rafal Scherer. Humannet—a two-tiered deep neural network architecture for self-occluding humanoid pose
reconstruction.Sensors, 21(12):3945, 2021.
[74] Chan Yeong Kim, Seungbyn Baek, Junha Cha, Sunmo Yang, Eiru Kim, Edward M Marcotte,
Traver Hart, and Insuk Lee. Humannet v3: an improved database of human gene networks for
disease research.Nucleic acids research, 50(D1):D632–D639, 2022.
[75] Haitham A Elmarakeby, Justin Hwang, Rand Arafeh, Jett Crowdis, Sydney Gang, David Liu,
Saud H AlDubayan, Keyan Salari, Steven Kregel, Camden Richter, et al. Biologically informed
deep neural network for prostate cancer discovery.Nature, 598(7880):348–352, 2021.
[76] Michael Ku Yu, Michael Kramer, Janusz Dutkowski, Rohith Srivas, Katherine Licon, Jason F
Kreisberg, Cherie T Ng, Nevan Krogan, Roded Sharan, and Trey Ideker. Translation of
genotype to phenotype by a hierarchy of cell subsystems.Cell systems, 2(2):77–88, 2016.

[PAGE 32]
[77] Jianzhu Ma, Michael Ku Yu, Samson Fong, Keiichiro Ono, Eric Sage, Barry Demchak, Roded
Sharan, and Trey Ideker. Using deep learning to model the hierarchical structure and function
of a cell.Nature methods, 15(4):290–298, 2018.
[78] Xinnan Dai, Caihua Shan, Jie Zheng, Xiaoxiao Li, and Dongsheng Li. Biological factor
regulatory neural network.arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04982, 2023.
[79] National Center for Biotechnology Information Bethesda (MD): National Library of
Medicine (US). Gene [internet].https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/, date.
[80] Johns Hopkins University McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine. Online mendelian
inheritance in man, omim.http://www.myurl.com, date.
[81] Elisabeth Coudert, Sebastien Gehant, Edouard De Castro, Monica Pozzato, Delphine Baratin,
Teresa Neto, Christian JA Sigrist, Nicole Redaschi, and Alan Bridge. Annotation of biologically
relevant ligands in uniprotkb using chebi.Bioinformatics, 39(1):btac793, 2023.
[82] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models
are few-shot learners.Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[83] Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making pre-trained language models better
few-shot learners. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli, editors,
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 3816–3830, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[84] Wenpin Hou and Zhicheng Ji. Geneturing tests gpt models in genomics.BioRxiv, 2023.
[85] Ziwei Chai, Tianjie Zhang, Liang Wu, Kaiqiao Han, Xiaohai Hu, Xuanwen Huang, and Yang
Yang. Graphllm: Boosting graph reasoning ability of large language model.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.05845, 2023.
[86] Vinitra Swamy, Angelika Romanou, and Martin Jaggi. Interpreting language models through
knowledge graph extraction.arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08546, 2021.
[87] Yuntong Hu, Zheng Zhang, and Liang Zhao. Beyond text: A deep dive into large language
models’ ability on understanding graph data.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04944, 2023.
[88] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. InProceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318, 2002.
[89] Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. InText summarization
branches out, pages 74–81, 2004.
[90] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
[91] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. InInternational conference on machine learning,
pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

[TABLE page=32 index=1]
Columns: [88] | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
Row 1: [88]: | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic: evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
Row 2: [88]: | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic: for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318, 2002.
Row 3: [88]: [89] | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic: Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
Row 4: [88]: | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic: branches out, pages 74–81, 2004.
Row 5: [88]: [90] | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic: Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Row 6: [88]: | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic: Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
Row 7: [88]: | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic: processing systems, 30, 2017.
Row 8: [88]: [91] | Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic: Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 33]
[92] Yixin Liu, Kai Zhang, Yuan Li, Zhiling Yan, Chujie Gao, Ruoxi Chen, Zhengqing Yuan, Yue
Huang, Hanchi Sun, Jianfeng Gao, et al. Sora: A review on background, technology, limitations,
and opportunities of large vision models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17177, 2024.
[93] Chameleon Team. Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.09818, 2024.
[94] Gyeong-Geon Lee, Lehong Shi, Ehsan Latif, Yizhu Gao, Arne Bewersdorf, Matthew Nyaaba,
Shuchen Guo, Zihao Wu, Zhengliang Liu, Hui Wang, et al. Multimodality of ai for education:
Towards artificial general intelligence.arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06037, 2023.
[95] Fei Dou, Jin Ye, Geng Yuan, Qin Lu, Wei Niu, Haijian Sun, Le Guan, Guoyu Lu, Gengchen
Mai, Ninghao Liu, et al. Towards artificial general intelligence (agi) in the internet of things
(iot): Opportunities and challenges.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07438, 2023.
[96] Zhenxiang Xiao, Yuzhong Chen, Lu Zhang, Junjie Yao, Zihao Wu, Xiaowei Yu, Yi Pan, Lin
Zhao, Chong Ma, Xinyu Liu, et al. Instruction-vit: Multi-modal prompts for instruction
learning in vit.arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00201, 2023.
[97] Yiheng Liu, Hao He, Tianle Han, Xu Zhang, Mengyuan Liu, Jiaming Tian, Yutong Zhang,
Jiaqi Wang, Xiaohui Gao, Tianyang Zhong, et al. Understanding llms: A comprehensive
overview from training to inference.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02038, 2024.
[98] Zhengliang Liu, Lu Zhang, Zihao Wu, Xiaowei Yu, Chao Cao, Haixing Dai, Ninghao Liu, Jun
Liu, Wei Liu, Quanzheng Li, et al. Surviving chatgpt in healthcare.Frontiers in Radiology,
3:1224682, 2024.
[99] Xiang Li, Lu Zhang, Zihao Wu, Zhengliang Liu, Lin Zhao, Yixuan Yuan, Jun Liu, Gang Li,
Dajiang Zhu, Pingkun Yan, et al. Artificial general intelligence for medical imaging.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.05480, 2023.
[100] Jiaqi Wang, Zihao Wu, Yiwei Li, Hanqi Jiang, Peng Shu, Enze Shi, Huawen Hu, Chong Ma,
Yiheng Liu, Xuhui Wang, et al. Large language models for robotics: Opportunities, challenges,
and perspectives.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04334, 2024.
[101] Lin Zhao, Zihao Wu, Haixing Dai, Zhengliang Liu, Tuo Zhang, Dajiang Zhu, and Tianming
Liu. Embedding human brain function via transformer. InInternational Conference on Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages 366–375. Springer, 2022.
[102] Zhengliang Liu, Peilong Wang, Yiwei Li, Jason Holmes, Peng Shu, Lian Zhang, Chenbin Liu,
Ninghao Liu, Dajiang Zhu, Xiang Li, et al. Radonc-gpt: A large language model for radiation
oncology.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10160, 2023.
[103] Hongmin Cai, Xiaoke Huang, Zhengliang Liu, Wenxiong Liao, Haixing Dai, Zihao Wu, Dajiang
Zhu, Hui Ren, Quanzheng Li, Tianming Liu, et al. Exploring multimodal approaches for
alzheimer’s disease detection using patient speech transcript and audio data.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.02514, 2023.
[104] Hongmin Cai, Xiaoke Huang, Zhengliang Liu, Wenxiong Liao, Haixing Dai, Zihao Wu, Dajiang
Zhu, Hui Ren, Quanzheng Li, Tianming Liu, et al. Multimodal approaches for alzheimer’s detection using patients’ speech and transcript. InInternational Conference on Brain Informatics,
pages 395–406. Springer, 2023.

[PAGE 34]
[105] Zhengliang Liu, Aoxiao Zhong, Yiwei Li, Longtao Yang, Chao Ju, Zihao Wu, Chong Ma,
Peng Shu, Cheng Chen, Sekeun Kim, et al. Tailoring large language models to radiology:
A preliminary approach to llm adaptation for a highly specialized domain. InInternational
Workshop on Machine Learning in Medical Imaging, pages 464–473. Springer, 2023.
[106] Chenjiao Tan, Qian Cao, Yiwei Li, Jielu Zhang, Xiao Yang, Huaqin Zhao, Zihao Wu, Zhengliang
Liu, Hao Yang, Nemin Wu, et al. On the promises and challenges of multimodal foundation
models for geographical, environmental, agricultural, and urban planning applications.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.17016, 2023.
[107] Minghao Xu, Xinyu Yuan, Santiago Miret, and Jian Tang. Protst: Multi-modality learning of
protein sequences and biomedical texts. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 38749–38767. PMLR, 2023.
[108] Michael Heinzinger, Konstantin Weissenow, Joaquin Gomez Sanchez, Adrian Henkel, Milot
Mirdita, Martin Steinegger, and Burkhard Rost. Bilingual language model for protein sequence
and structure.bioRxiv, pages 2023–07, 2023.
[109] Kristin L Bigos and Daniel R Weinberger. Imaging genetics—days of future past.Neuroimage,
53(3):804–809, 2010.
[110] Xia-AnBi, KeChen, SiyuJiang, ShengLuo, WenyanZhou, ZhaoxuXing, LuyunXu, Zhengliang
Liu, and Tianming Liu. Community graph convolution neural network for alzheimer’s disease
classification and pathogenetic factors identification.IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, 2023.
[111] Xia-an Bi, YangJun Huang, Zicheng Yang, Ke Chen, Zhaoxu Xing, Luyun Xu, Xiang Li,
Zhengliang Liu, and Tianming Liu. Structure mapping generative adversarial network for
multi-view information mapping pattern mining.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2023.
[112] John B Kwok, Clement T Loy, Carol Dobson-Stone, and Glenda M Halliday. The complex
relationship between genotype, pathology and phenotype in familial dementia.Neurobiology of
Disease, 145:105082, 2020.
[113] Thomas J Montine, Creighton H Phelps, Thomas G Beach, Eileen H Bigio, Nigel J Cairns,
Dennis W Dickson, Charles Duyckaerts, Matthew P Frosch, Eliezer Masliah, Suzanne S Mirra,
et al. National institute on aging–alzheimer’s association guidelines for the neuropathologic
assessment of alzheimer’s disease: a practical approach.Acta neuropathologica, 123:1–11, 2012.
[114] Lu Zhang, Li Wang, Tianming Liu, and Dajiang Zhu. Disease2vec: Encoding alzheimer’s
progression via disease embedding tree.Pharmacological Research, 199:107038, 2024.
[115] Lu Zhang, Li Wang, Jean Gao, Shannon L Risacher, Jingwen Yan, Gang Li, Tianming
Liu, Dajiang Zhu, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, et al. Deep fusion of brain
structure-function in mild cognitive impairment.Medical image analysis, 72:102082, 2021.
[116] Randall J Bateman, Paul S Aisen, Bart De Strooper, Nick C Fox, Cynthia A Lemere, John M
Ringman, Stephen Salloway, Reisa A Sperling, Manfred Windisch, and Chengjie Xiong.
Autosomal-dominantalzheimer’sdisease: areviewandproposalforthepreventionofalzheimer’s
disease.Alzheimer’s research & therapy, 3:1–13, 2011.
[117] Andrew J Saykin, Li Shen, Xiaohui Yao, Sungeun Kim, Kwangsik Nho, Shannon L Risacher,
Vijay K Ramanan, Tatiana M Foroud, Kelley M Faber, Nadeem Sarwar, et al. Genetic studies

[PAGE 35]
of quantitative mci and ad phenotypes in adni: Progress, opportunities, and plans.Alzheimer’s
& Dementia, 11(7):792–814, 2015.
[118] Manuel Menéndez. Pathological and clinical heterogeneity of presenilin 1 gene mutations.
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 6(5):475–482, 2004.
[119] Claire E Shepherd, Gillian C Gregory, James C Vickers, William S Brooks, John BJ Kwok,
Peter R Schofield, Jillian J Kril, and Glenda M Halliday. Positional effects of presenilin-1
mutations on tau phosphorylation in cortical plaques.Neurobiology of disease, 15(1):115–119,
2004.
[120] Thomas J Grabowski, Hyun Soon Cho, Jean Paul G Vonsattel, G William Rebeck, and
Steven M Greenberg. Novel amyloid precursor protein mutation in an iowa family with
dementia and severe cerebral amyloid angiopathy.Annals of Neurology: Official Journal of the
American Neurological Association and the Child Neurology Society, 49(6):697–705, 2001.
[121] Yu Wei Lin and Daniel Truong. Diffuse lewy body disease.Journal of the Neurological Sciences,
399:144–150, 2019.
[122] Susanne A Schneider and Roy N Alcalay. Neuropathology of genetic synucleinopathies with
parkinsonism: review of the literature.Movement Disorders, 32(11):1504–1523, 2017.
[123] Vijay K Ramanan, Kwangsik Nho, Li Shen, Shannon L Risacher, Sungeun Kim, Brenna C
McDonald, Martin R Farlow, Tatiana M Foroud, Sujuan Gao, Hilkka Soininen, et al. Fastkd2
is associated with memory and hippocampal structure in older adults.Molecular psychiatry,
20(10):1197–1204, 2015.