[PAGE 1]
Exploring Large Language Models for Hate Speech Detection in
Rioplatense Spanish
Juan Manuel Pérez
Instituto de Cs. de la Computación
CONICET, UBA
jmperez at dc.uba.ar
Paula Miguel
Instituto Gino Germani
FSOC, UBA
CONICET
paula at sociales.uba.ar
Viviana Cotik
Instituto de Cs. de la Computación
Departamento de Computación, FCEN UBA
CONICET, UBA
vcotik at dc.uba.ar
Abstract
Hate speech detection deals with many language variants, slang, slurs, expression modalities, and cultural nuances. This outlines the
importance of working with specific corpora,
when addressing hate speech within the scope
of Natural Language Processing, recently revolutionized by the irruption of Large Language
Models. This work presents a brief analysis of
the performance of large language models in
the detection of Hate Speech for Rioplatense
Spanish. We performed classification experiments leveraging chain-of-thought reasoning
with ChatGPT 3.5, Mixtral, and Aya, comparing their results with those of a state-of-theart BERT classifier. These experiments outline that, even if large language models show
a lower precision compared to the fine-tuned
BERT classifier and, in some cases, they find
hard-to-get slurs or colloquialisms, they still
are sensitive to highly nuanced cases (particularly, homophobic/transphobic hate speech).
We make our code and models publicly available for future research.
1 Introduction
In recent years, an increasingly unfolding of violent, discriminatory and hateful speeches can be
found on digital platforms, media and networks
(Berecz and Devinat, 2017; Woods and Hahner,
2019; Hodge and Hallgrímsdóttir, 2021). While
discriminatory discourses emerge in different enunciation areas and modalities, we are particularly interested in the way this kind of problematic speech
is spreed along with certain themes in the public
arena and the circulation of news (Assimakopoulos
et al., 2017). The news published on social networks encourages the debate or discussion of public issues and problems among users. And many
times the tweets displaying hate speech are reactions to that news tweets, meaning the context of
those messages is extremely important (Cotik et al.,
2020). Social media, such as Twitter, offers valuable data access to a relatively natural environment
for the study of hate speech, being particularly interesting the activation of hate speech regarding public
topics, for example topics triggered by news that
are subject of discussion (Zannettou et al., 2020;
Erjavec and Kovaˇciˇc, 2012).
Hate speech detection, from the Natural Language Processing (NLP) perspective, has to deal
with languages crossed by variants, slang, slurs,
and other specific modalities found (Nunberg,
2018; Diaz-Legaspe, 2020). Being aware of cultural nuances and specific contexts of use is crucial
to address this task and shows the relevance of developing dialectal corpora and analysis that allows
to automatically detect specific hateful expressions
in different lexical contexts.
Regarding this issue, a particular interest arises
in the performance of large language models
(LLMs) by analyzing hate speech in relation to
local expression nuances. LLMs have shown to be
effective in a wide range of NLP tasks (Brown et al.,
2020; Wei et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022). Given
that GPT-3.5 (also known as ChatGPT) is one of the
most popular and emerging large language models
(Wu et al., 2023; Deng and Lin, 2022), we have the
question of how well it can detect hateful messages
in a specific dialectal variant of Spanish, focusing
on the Rioplatense variety.
With over 450 million native speakers, primarily
arXiv:2410.12174v1 [cs.CL] 16 Oct 2024

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language | for the study of hate speech, being particularly interRow 1: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: Models. This work presents a brief analysis of | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: esting the activation of hate speech regarding public
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: the performance of large language models in | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: topics, for example topics triggered by news that
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: the detection of Hate Speech for Rioplatense | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: are subject of discussion (Zannettou et al., 2020;
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: Spanish. We performed classification experi- | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: ments leveraging chain-of-thought reasoning | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: Erjavec and Kovačič, 2012).
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: with ChatGPT 3.5, Mixtral, and Aya, compar- | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: Hate speech detection, from the Natural LanRow 9: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: ing their results with those of a state-of-the- | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: guage Processing (NLP) perspective, has to deal
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: art BERT classifier. These experiments out- | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: with languages crossed by variants, slang, slurs,
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: line that, even if large language models show | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: and other specific modalities found (Nunberg,
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: a lower precision compared to the fine-tuned | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: 2018; Diaz-Legaspe, 2020). Being aware of culRow 14: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: BERT classifier and, in some cases, they find | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: tural nuances and specific contexts of use is crucial
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: hard-to-get slurs or colloquialisms, they still | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-:
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: are sensitive to highly nuanced cases (partic- | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: to address this task and shows the relevance of deRow 18: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: ularly, homophobic/transphobic hate speech). | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: veloping dialectal corpora and analysis that allows
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: We make our code and models publicly avail- | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: to automatically detect specific hateful expressions
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: able for future research. | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: in different lexical contexts.
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: Regarding this issue, a particular interest arises
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: 1 | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: Introduction | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-:
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: in the performance of large language models
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: In recent years, an increasingly unfolding of vio- | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: (LLMs) by analyzing hate speech in relation to
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: lent, discriminatory and hateful speeches can be | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: local expression nuances. LLMs have shown to be
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: found on digital platforms, media and networks | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: effective in a wide range of NLP tasks (Brown et al.,
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: (Berecz and Devinat, 2017; Woods and Hahner, | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: 2020; Wei et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022). Given
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: 2019; Hodge and Hallgrímsdóttir, 2021). | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: While | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: that GPT-3.5 (also known as ChatGPT) is one of the
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: discriminatory discourses emerge in different enun- | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: most popular and emerging large language models
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: ciation areas and modalities, we are particularly in- | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: (Wu et al., 2023; Deng and Lin, 2022), we have the
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: terested in the way this kind of problematic speech | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: question of how well it can detect hateful messages
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: is spreed along with certain themes in the public | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: in a specific dialectal variant of Spanish, focusing
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: arena and the circulation of news (Assimakopoulos | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: on the Rioplatense variety.
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: et al., 2017). | lutionized by the irruption of Large Language: The news published on social net- | for the study of hate speech, being particularly inter-: With over 450 million native speakers, primarily
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
in Latin America, Spain, and also parts of the US
(Eberhard, David M. and Simons, Gary F., and Fennig, Charles D., 2024), Spanish includes many varieties and dialects. Each one represents a common
cultural background and semantic field, expressing
different uses for some words or, contrary wise,
the use of specific words or phrases addressing the
same purpose. Among them, Rioplatense Spanish, mainly spoken both in Argentina and Uruguay,
is thought to be spoken by more than one-tenth
of Spanish native speakers (Lipski, 2012; Coloma,
2018).
One of the most interesting features of Rioplatense Spanish is that includes ruralisms, indigenisms, argot and slang, especially lunfardo,
among other vocabularies. While almost all languages have repertoires of expression outside of
general use, the case of lunfardo constitutes a linguistic phenomenon in which words and expressions of very diverse origin converge (Italian, popular Spanish, French, Portuguese, Guaraní, Quechua,
among others), as result of the migratory processes
in Argentina, with its epicenter in Buenos Aires,
especially during the 19th century and the first half
of the 20th century (de Letras, 2003; Conde, 2013).
Lunfardo shows as an integrated lexical repertoire,
which has around 6,000 voices, of which only about
300 are recognized by the Dictionary of the Royal
Spanish Academy,1 such as the term " laburar",
from Italian " lavorare", standing as the verb "to
work" or "trabajar" in Spanish. Many words have
other meanings, for example "trola" means a lie o
deceit in Iberian Spanish, but in Rioplatense Spanish it refers to "whore", and it also has a masculine
form " trolo" that means " faggot". These terms
are commonly used to derogatorily address both
women and gays. These examples point out that
the understanding of many expressions constitutes
a challenge even to Spanish native speakers unfamiliar with the Rioplatense variant. Would that be
the case of LLMs?
Following that question, this paper develops an
exploratory approach to the effectiveness of LLMs
addressing the task of detecting specific texts and
tagging corpora linked to hate speech. We take as
a benchmark a fine-tuned BERT classifier trained
with a corpus of news articles and Twitter’s comments in Rioplatense Spanish, annotated to detect
hate speech (Pérez et al., 2023). We performed
1The Royal Spanish Academy (RAE) is a cultural institution dedicated to linguistic regularization in the Spanishspeaking world.
classification experiments leveraging the chain-ofthought (CoT) reasoning within the LLMs ChatGPT, Mixtral and Aya, and compare their results
against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experiments point out that LLMs show a lower precision
compared to the fine-tuned BERT classifier, but a
higher recall for highly nuanced cases (particularly,
homophobic/transphobic hate speech). However,
explanations given by ChatGPT are —while not
equal to human annotators— convincing in most
cases.
The results of this work, focused in Rioplatense
Spanish, contribute to understanding possible
forms of bias and to evaluate the specificity of Rioplatense variant that is not part of the typical corpus
used for training LLMs. This highlights its unique
characteristics and the importance of developing
and working with dialect-specific corpora for the
automated detection of hate speech. Focusing exclusively on Rioplatense Spanish is a first step in
addressing cultural nuances and specific local expressions inherent in this dialect, particularly in
relation to the performance of LLMs. Future work
could be pursued on this basis, aiming to compare
Rioplatense Spanish with other variants, such as
Mexican or Iberian Spanish.
2 Related work
There is a plethora of resources for automatic detection of hate speech in English. Nevertheless,
when it comes to Spanish, despite being one of
the main languages in terms of the number of native speakers worldwide (Eberhard, David M. and
Simons, Gary F., and Fennig, Charles D., 2024),
corpora are scarce, with only a few datasets publicly available. Some of the main references of
published and available resources in Spanish are
found in datasets like IberEval, which presents a
~4k Twitter dataset for the Automatic Misogyny
Identification (AMI) (Fersini et al., 2018); those
released by the MEX-A3T task, that included a
dataset of ˜11k Mexican Spanish tweets annotated
for aggressiveness (Álvarez-Carmona et al., 2018);
and the dataset launched in the context of the HatEval challenge, a ~6.6k tweets dataset annotated
for misogyny and xenophobia (Basile et al., 2019).
To the best of our knowledge, only one dataset
annotated for hate speech detection is available in
Rioplatense (Pérez et al., 2023). This highlights the
positive impact of contributions tending to build
resources in Spanish and its variants.

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experiRow 1: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: cultural background and semantic field, expressing | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: ments point out that LLMs show a lower precision
Row 2: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: different uses for some words or, contrary wise, | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: compared to the fine-tuned BERT classifier, but a
Row 3: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: the use of specific words or phrases addressing the | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: higher recall for highly nuanced cases (particularly,
Row 4: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: same purpose. Among them, Rioplatense Span- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: homophobic/transphobic hate speech). However,
Row 5: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: ish, mainly spoken both in Argentina and Uruguay, | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: explanations given by ChatGPT are —while not
Row 6: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: is thought to be spoken by more than one-tenth | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: equal to human annotators— convincing in most
Row 7: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: of Spanish native speakers (Lipski, 2012; Coloma, | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: cases.
Row 8: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: 2018). | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: The results of this work, focused in Rioplatense
Row 9: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: One of the most interesting features of Rio- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: Spanish, contribute to understanding possible
Row 10: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: platense Spanish is that includes ruralisms, in- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: forms of bias and to evaluate the specificity of RioRow 11: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: digenisms, argot and slang, especially lunfardo, | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: platense variant that is not part of the typical corpus
Row 12: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: among other vocabularies. While almost all lan- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: used for training LLMs. This highlights its unique
Row 13: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: guages have repertoires of expression outside of | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: characteristics and the importance of developing
Row 14: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: general use, the case of lunfardo constitutes a lin- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: and working with dialect-specific corpora for the
Row 15: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: guistic phenomenon in which words and expres- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: automated detection of hate speech. Focusing exRow 16: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: sions of very diverse origin converge (Italian, popu- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: clusively on Rioplatense Spanish is a first step in
Row 17: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: lar Spanish, French, Portuguese, Guaraní, Quechua, | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: addressing cultural nuances and specific local exRow 18: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: among others), as result of the migratory processes | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: pressions inherent in this dialect, particularly in
Row 19: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: in Argentina, with its epicenter in Buenos Aires, | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: relation to the performance of LLMs. Future work
Row 20: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: especially during the 19th century and the first half | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: could be pursued on this basis, aiming to compare
Row 21: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: of the 20th century (de Letras, 2003; Conde, 2013). | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: Rioplatense Spanish with other variants, such as
Row 22: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: Lunfardo shows as an integrated lexical repertoire, | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: Mexican or Iberian Spanish.
Row 23: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: which has around 6,000 voices, of which only about | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-:
Row 24: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: 300 are recognized by the Dictionary of the Royal | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: 2 Related work
Row 25: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: Spanish Academy,1 such as the term "laburar", | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-:
Row 26: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: from Italian "lavorare", standing as the verb "to | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: There is a plethora of resources for automatic deRow 27: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: work" or "trabajar" in Spanish. Many words have | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: tection of hate speech in English. Nevertheless,
Row 28: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: other meanings, for example "trola" means a lie o | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: when it comes to Spanish, despite being one of
Row 29: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: deceit in Iberian Spanish, but in Rioplatense Span- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: the main languages in terms of the number of naRow 30: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: ish it refers to "whore", and it also has a masculine | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: tive speakers worldwide (Eberhard, David M. and
Row 31: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: form "trolo" that means "faggot". These terms | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: Simons, Gary F., and Fennig, Charles D., 2024),
Row 32: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: are commonly used to derogatorily address both | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: corpora are scarce, with only a few datasets pubRow 33: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: women and gays. These examples point out that | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: licly available. Some of the main references of
Row 34: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: the understanding of many expressions constitutes | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: published and available resources in Spanish are
Row 35: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: a challenge even to Spanish native speakers unfa- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: found in datasets like IberEval, which presents a
Row 36: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: miliar with the Rioplatense variant. Would that be | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: ~4k Twitter dataset for the Automatic Misogyny
Row 37: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: the case of LLMs? | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: Identification (AMI) (Fersini et al., 2018); those
Row 38: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: Following that question, this paper develops an | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: released by the MEX-A3T task, that included a
Row 39: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: exploratory approach to the effectiveness of LLMs | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: dataset of 1̃1k Mexican Spanish tweets annotated
Row 40: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: addressing the task of detecting specific texts and | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: for aggressiveness (Álvarez-Carmona et al., 2018);
Row 41: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: tagging corpora linked to hate speech. We take as | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: and the dataset launched in the context of the HatRow 42: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: a benchmark a fine-tuned BERT classifier trained | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: Eval challenge, a ~6.6k tweets dataset annotated
Row 43: rieties and dialects. Each one represents a common: with a corpus of news articles and Twitter’s com- | against a fine-tuned BERT classifier. Our experi-: for misogyny and xenophobia (Basile et al., 2019).
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
Regarding the automatic detection and treatment
of hate speech, a broad amount of literature has
been published. We refer the readers to Poletto et al.
(2021); Schmidt and Wiegand (2017); Fortuna and
Nunes (2018) for extensive reviews of work in the
field of NLP. In this section, we focus on the most
recent work on hate speech detection, explanation,
and treatment using LLMs.
Upon the blazing development of LLMs (Brown
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022),
some studies have been conducted to evaluate
their performance in hate speech detection, explanation and treatment. Sap et al. (2020) used
GPT-2 to detect and generate hate speech explanations. Plaza-del arco et al. (2023) assessed the
performance of several language models (such as
the instruction-finetuned mT0 (Muennighoff et al.,
2023) and FLAN-T5 (Chung et al., 2022) in zeroshot setting over several hate speech and toxicity
datasets. Wang et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2023)
evaluated the performance of GPT-3/GPT-3.5 to
detect and explain hate speech messages, finding
that LLM-generated explanations are equally good
(and even preferred to) human-written explanations.
Some of these explanations are inducted by chainof-thought reasoning (Wei et al., 2022), also known
as the “let’s think step by step” technique. Oliveira
et al. (2023) tested ChatGPT for hate speech detection in Portuguese, particularly in its Brazilian
dialect, achieving almost state-of-the-art results in
a zero-shot setting. Çam and Özgür (2023) performed experiments for Turkish, with similar results.
3 Data
Our experiments are based on an anonymized
dataset available in Rioplatense Spanish, consisting of Twitter replies to posts from Argentinean
news outlets; with models, partitions and class
distributions arealso available (Pérez et al., 2023).
In this dataset, comments to news posted by regional users were annotated for the presence of
hate speech and categorized into one or more of
eight possible types: politics, misogyny, homophobia/transphobia, racism/xenophobia, class hatred,
appearance, hate against criminals and disabled
people. All annotated instances have a context (the
tweet posted by the news outlet, plus the news title
and whole text content of the news) and the text
being analyzed and annotated for hate speech (each
Twitter user’s comment). This is important as contextual information situates the comment and that it
has been shown to be relevant to detect hate speech
(Sheth et al., 2022; Xenos et al., 2021). Along with
the annotated dataset, another unannotated dataset
suitable for unsupervised training is provided. The
unsupervised corpus used to continue pre-training
includes around 5,000,000 Rioplatense tweets comments, with a contextual information of 288,000
news tweets and full articles.
In this work, we address the presence of hate
speech linked to four possible types: misogyny,
homophobia/transphobia, racism/xenophobia, and
class hatred/classism, according to the attacked
characteristics, from now on dubbed WOMEN,
LGBTI, RACISM, and CLASS (see Appendix A.1
for a broader definition). The selection of those
categories was made based on the prevalence of
each category among hateful speech and their societal impact. Also, these topics are widely covered
and considered in the available literature, meaning
the results could be a useful contribution to standard ground and state of the art (Paz et al., 2020;
Tontodimamma et al., 2021).
We used the same train and development samples as Pérez et al. (2023) ( 36, 420 and 9120 examples respectively), but, for budget reasons, we
subsampled the test set to 5670 examples (50% of
the original test set). Among these, 479 comments
contain hate speech, distributed as shown in Table
1. Some comments express attacks to more than
one category. In those cases, we find two relevant
combinations: RACISM associated with CLASS
(21 cases), followed by the association of WOMEN
and LGBTI (10 cases). Only one comment targeted
3 categories at the same time. Table 2 shows some
examples of the dataset.
In order to assess whether the large language
models were able to capture the meaning of regional terms and expressions or not, we marked the
test dataset for the presence of regionalisms. We referred to regionalisms as idiomatic phrases, words
Category Number Percentage
RACISM 230 4.06 %
WOMEN 131 2.31 %
LGBTI 88 1.55 %
CLASS 76 1.34 %
TOTAL 479 8.45 %
Table 1: Number and percentage of messages containing
hate speech in each category.

[PAGE 4]
Category Context Comment
WOMEN Mia Khalifa: acted in porn videos for a few months,
became world famous and now fights to erase her
past
HAHAHA KEEP SUCKING....
LGBTI The story of the Colombian trans model kissing the
belly of her eight-month pregnant husband
A male kissing another male
RACISM Yanzhong Huang: “It is quite likely that a Covid-21
is already brewing”
Urgent bombs to that damned race
CLASS Social movements cut off 9 de Julio Av.: they demand a minimum wage of $45,000
get to work, mfs
Table 2: Hateful examples from the analyzed dataset.
exclusively used in Rioplatense Spanish, or with a
meaning that is differentially used in Argentina or
only in Rioplatense-speaking countries (eg. "pelotudo" for "asshole"). As aforementioned, there is a
vacancy area regarding Rioplatense: resources are
scarce and, when available, they are not the best to
work with. Therefore, we generated a very basic
and not exhaustive list of regional terms, scraped
from an crowd-sourced dictionary of regionalisms
in Rioplatense Spanish.2
4 Classification experiments
We compared two kinds of classification algorithms:
• Pre-trained language models based on BERT:
fine-tuned on supervised data from the corpus.
• Large Language Models (LLMs) using fewshot learning and chain-of-thought reasoning
(CoT) (Wei et al., 2022).
For the first group of classifiers, we tested two
pre-trained models in Spanish: BETO (Cañete et al.,
2020), and RoBERTuito (Pérez et al., 2022). For
each model, we performed a small hyperparameter
search following the guidelines of Godbole et al.
(2023), searching for the best-performing values
for the number of epochs, the learning rate and
warm-up ratio. To track our experiments, we used
the wandb library (Biewald, 2020). For each of
the pre-trained models, we previously fine-tuned
them on the unsupervised corpus provided along
with the used dataset (Pérez et al., 2023), as it has
been shown to improve the performance in domainspecific tasks (Gururangan et al., 2020).
The fine-tuning process of the supervised models
followed standard practices in fine-tuning BERTlike models. The classifiers were trained with
2https://www.diccionarioargentino.com/
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) as the optimizer
with weight decay, and a triangular learning rate
schedule.
Table 3 outlines the spectrum of values applied
to each hyperparameter. For every model, task, and
language, we conducted between 30 and 60 runs,
choosing the optimal model based on the Macro F1
score from the validation set. We adopted a batch
size of 32, tailored to accommodate our GPU memory limitations (either a GTX 1080Ti or Tesla T4,
with memory ranging from 11 to 14GB). The best
hyperparameters found in the tuning process were
roughly the same for all the models: 0.1 for warmup ratio, 3 and 4 (only RoBERTuito on its nonfinetuned version) the number of training epochs,
and finally 6e−5 for the learning rate.
4.1 Prompting strategies
Regarding the large language models, we selected
three models that show good performance in Spanish to run the experiments and prompts:
• GPT-3.5 turbo-0125 (Ouyang et al., 2022): a
closed-source large language model provided
by OpenAI, that has an outstanding performance in several tasks.
• Mixtral (Jiang et al., 2024): a mixture-ofexperts open-source language model pretrained in English, French, Italian, German
and Spanish.
Hyperparameter Values
Epochs 3, 4, 5
Batch Size 32
Learning Rate 2e-5, 3e-5, 5e-5, 6e-5, 7e-5, 8e-5, 1e-4
Weight Decay 0.1
Warmup Ratio 0.06, 0.08, 0.10
Table 3: Hyperparameter search space considered for
each model.

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: tudo" for "asshole"). As aforementioned, there is a | Table 3 outlines the spectrum of values applied
Row 1: tudo" for "asshole"). As aforementioned, there is a: vacancy area regarding Rioplatense: resources are | Table 3 outlines the spectrum of values applied: to each hyperparameter. For every model, task, and
Row 2: tudo" for "asshole"). As aforementioned, there is a: scarce and, when available, they are not the best to | Table 3 outlines the spectrum of values applied: language, we conducted between 30 and 60 runs,
Row 3: tudo" for "asshole"). As aforementioned, there is a: work with. Therefore, we generated a very basic | Table 3 outlines the spectrum of values applied: choosing the optimal model based on the Macro F1
Row 4: tudo" for "asshole"). As aforementioned, there is a: and not exhaustive list of regional terms, scraped | Table 3 outlines the spectrum of values applied: score from the validation set. We adopted a batch
Row 5: tudo" for "asshole"). As aforementioned, there is a: from an crowd-sourced dictionary of regionalisms | Table 3 outlines the spectrum of values applied: size of 32, tailored to accommodate our GPU mem-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
• Aya (Üstün et al., 2024): a massivelymultilingual sequence-to-sequence language
model, that follows the architecture ofT5 (Raffel et al., 2020), pre-trained in 101 languages.
Mixtral and Aya were run in two NVIDIA A30,
using the Transformers library. The same prompt
was used for the three LLMs.
To build the prompt, we resorted to few-shot or
in-context learning. Early experiments using zeroshot, one-shot settings and few-shot learning were
conducted. Then, different prompts were evaluated
in the development split until no improvement in
performance was observed.
That prompt engineering process led to the following prompt:3
Determine if the following text, corresponding to a tweet, presented with a
context, contains hate speech. We understand that there is hate speech if it has
statements of an intense and irrational
nature of rejection, enmity, and abhorrence against an individual or against a
group, being the targets of these expressions for possessing a protected characteristic. The protected characteristics we
consider are:
• WOMEN: refers to women or the
feminist movement
• LGBTI: refers to gays, lesbians,
transgender individuals, and other
gender identities
• RACISM: refers to immigrants,
xenophobia, or against indigenous
peoples
• CLASS: refers to low-income people or class-related issues
The tweets are written in Rioplatense
Spanish, and within the cultural context
of Argentina. Respond with one or more
of the characteristics separated by commas, or "nothing" if there is no hate
speech. Think and justify the response
step by step before answering.
We leveraged chain-of-thought reasoning (Wei
et al., 2022) to both enhance the model’s performance and to provide an explanation for the prediction. The model was prompted with a total of 12
3Originally in Rioplatense Spanish (see in Appendix),
translated to English for the purpose of this paper.
WOMEN RACISM LGBTI CLASS Macro
BETO 0.366 0.698 0.414 0.473 0.570
RoBERTuito 0.414 0.675 0.435 0.451 0.582
BETO (FT) 0.422 0.736 0.468 0.511 0.614
RoBERTuito (FT) 0.405 0.694 0.474 0.471 0.598
Table 4: F1 scores for the considered BERT classifiers.
FT stands for fine-tuned, marking those pre-trained models that were further fine-tuned in the unsupervised corpus.
examples of hate speech considering the different
characteristics. The examples were selected from
the training set, and consisted of three lines, such
as this:
context: Wuhan celebrates the end of the
coronavirus quarantine with a message
for the rest of the world: “Learn from
our mistakes”
text: Motherfuckers! I wish you all chinese people die
output: The text wishes that Chinese
people would die, blaming them for
the COVID-19 pandemic. answer is
“racism”.
The output consisted of a natural language explanation.
The 12 examples considered the different characteristics and target labels and were balanced by
their labels. They also included “nothing” examples, that pointed out cases where there was no hate
speech towards the targeted categories (women,
LGBTI, racism or class). The selection of examples provided in the prompt had the following distribution of categories: 2 examples for racism, 2
for LGBTI, 2 for women and 2 for "nothing"; 1
example for classism; and 1 multi-class example
for racism and class. The full list of examples and
the original prompt in Spanish can be found in
Appendix A.2.
4.2 Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of the classifiers, we
assessed the precision, recall, and F1-score for each
class, in a multi-label classification schema. We get
bootstrap 95%-CI intervals using the confidenceintervals library (Ferrer and Riera, 2023). We also
evaluated a subset of the dataset, that specifically
contains regional terms.
5 Results
Table 4 shows the F1 scores for all the considered
BERT classifiers. As mentioned in Section 4, we

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | Unnamed: 6 | Unnamed: 7 | Unnamed: 8 | WOMEN | RACISM | LGBTI | CLASS | Macro
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: • | Unnamed: 1: Aya | Unnamed: 2: (Üstün | Unnamed: 3: et | Unnamed: 4: al., | Unnamed: 5: 2024): | Unnamed: 6: a | Unnamed: 7: massively- | Unnamed: 8: BETO | WOMEN: 0.366 | RACISM: 0.698 | LGBTI: 0.414 | CLASS: 0.473 | Macro: 0.57
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
F1 Precision Recall
Model
Aya 21.2 ± 0.8 11 .9 ± 0.5 93 .0 ± 1.2
GPT-3.5 47.8 ± 1.8 39 .2 ± 1.8 61 .2 ± 2.2
Mixtral 38.6 ± 1.3 25 .1 ± 1.0 83 .8 ± 1.7
BETO 63.5 ± 1.8 72 .9 ± 2.4 56 .3 ± 2.1
Table 5: Classification results for LLMs and fine-tuned
BETO, expressed as macro averages of F1, Precision
and Recall for all the considered labels.
considered BETO (Cañete et al., 2020) and RoBERTuito (Pérez et al., 2022), and also their fine-tuned
versions in the unsupervised corpus provided by
the considered dataset (Pérez et al., 2023). We can
observe that, although RoBERTuito performs better in the non-finetuned version, BETO achieves
the best results after the pre-training process.
Table 5 shows the results for the multi-label classification task, represented as the macro averages of
F1, Precision and Recall. We report only the results
of the best BERT classifier, the fine-tuned version
of BETO. While the BETO classifier outperforms
their counterparts in terms of precision and F1, the
LLMs have higher recall. As Aya model performed
poorly, qualitative analysis is focused on the LLMs
GPT-3.5 and Mixtral.
A closer inspection of each of the considered
characteristics is presented in the multi-label classification results, shown in Figure 1. It is shown that
Mixtral obtains a better recall for all of the characteristics but at the cost of low precision, whileGPT3.5 has a better trade-off between them. The case of
the LGBTI characteristic, is particularly interesting
given that is the case where GPT-3.5 outperforms
the fine-tuned classifier (F 1 = 49 .9 ± 4.4 for GPT3.5 and F 1 = 45 .7±5.1 for BETO, Mann-Whitney
U=16386.5, p ≤ 1 ∗ 10−6). This is particularly
relevant as this characteristic is difficult to detect,
as it often involves culturally complex language,
irony and metaphors and where BERT-based classifiers show a significant gap compared to humans
(Yigezu et al., 2023; Pérez et al., 2023).
Focusing in those messages that contain regionalisms, no conclusive differences are detected. As
seen in 6, in general, the performance of all the classifiers follows similar patterns: they stay equal or
get better when regionalisms are present in the text.
This might be due to the fact that regionalisms are
likely to be matched with slang slurs which both the
BETO and the LLMs (particularly, GPT-3.5) leverage for this detection task. Indeed, hate speech
Figure 1: Precision, recall and F1 of the classifiers:
ChatGPT 3.5, Aya, Mixtral and the fine-tuned BETO
classifier.
Model BETO GPT-3.5 Mixtral
Regionalism reg. wo. reg. reg. wo. reg. reg. wo. reg.
CLASS 0.67 0.30 0.46 0.11 0.28 0.09
LGBTI 0.47 0.44 0.50 0.48 0.44 0.47
RACISM 0.70 0.76 0.60 0.54 0.56 0.50
WOMEN 0.51 0.27 0.42 0.25 0.39 0.20
Macro 0.60 0.48 0.50 0.37 0.42 0.32
Table 6: F1 by category for messages containing regionalism (reg.) and those not containing it (wo. reg.).
messages represented 9% of the original dataset,
and this rises to a 16% of hateful messages within
those that have regionalisms.
Following up, for example, in CLASS category,
words such as planero, villero, constituted part of
the repertoire of classist denigrational speech; and
regionalisms in form of slurs against WOMEN
(trola, yegua, abortera ) are also very common.
These two classes are, in fact, those with more
hateful comments containing regionalisms: 71%
of CLASS hateful messages contains regionalisms
and the same account for 62% of those against
women. These slur, regional expressions may make
the task of flagging hateful speech easier compared
to comments lacking it.
In the case of LGBTI hateful instances, when
hate speech detection task faces subtle, non-slur,
slang related language attacking transgender peo-

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | F1 | Precision | Recall
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Model | F1: | Precision: | Recall:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: Aya | F1: 21.2± 0.8 | Precision: 11.9± 0.5 | Recall: 93.0± 1.2
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: GPT-3.5 | F1: 47.8± 1.8 | Precision: 39.2± 1.8 | Recall: 61.2± 2.2
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Mixtral | F1: 38.6± 1.3 | Precision: 25.1± 1.0 | Recall: 83.8± 1.7
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: BETO | F1: 63.5± 1.8 | Precision: 72.9± 2.4 | Recall: 56.3± 2.1
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=6 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Regionalism | reg. | wo. reg. | reg..1 | wo. reg..1 | reg..2 | wo. reg..2
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: GPT-3.5 and Mixtral. | Regionalism: CLASS | reg.: 0.67 | wo. reg.: 0.3 | reg..1: 0.46 | wo. reg..1: 0.11 | reg..2: 0.28 | wo. reg..2: 0.09
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
News Context Reaction Tweet GPT-3.5 output Mixtral output
BETO false negatives correctly classified by LLMs
After a barrage of more than 20
shots, a trans woman was murdered in Rosario
The prostate should not appear in
the autopsy by law!
The message refers to the gender identity of the trans woman murdered in a
discriminatory manner, using an emoji to
mock the situation. The final answer is
"LGBTI".
The text refers to the victim as "a man"
and denies her gender identity. The final
answer is "LGBTI".
¿More Rial found love in a personal trainer? The mediatic
shared a live broadcast with a
handsome personal trainer where
they looked very intimate
That one sees a pingo (Arg. for
"horse", but also "dick") and
jumps on.
The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in
a derogatory way, using the term "pingo"
in a pejorative way to refer to a penis. The
final answer is "woman".
The text refers to More Rial as "that one"
and accuses her of getting on a man because of her physical attractiveness. This
is sexist and derogatory. The final answer
is "woman".
Mara Gómez: the story of the
first trans soccer player in the Argentine championship
Ponga huevos, Mara ponga
huevos... (Eggs on [winning],
Mara, Eggs on! Here "eggs"
stands for testicles)
The text cheers Mara Gómez as a soccer
player, but she uses the expression "ponga
huevos" in a discriminatory way, with the
aim of questioning her masculinity and
her gender identity as a trans woman. The
final answer is "LGBTI".
The text alludes to Mara Gómez’s lack
of "huevos", a term used to refer to the
lack of courage or bravery. This is offensive and derogatory. The final answer is
"woman, LGBTI."
Incorrectly classified or incorrect explanations by LLMs
British arrived in Peru for 10
days and stayed for love: she
lives without safe water and
among insects
The Peruvian’s "gaver". Mother.
("gaver" stands for "verga",
meaning dick. It is a sexist
comment, not racist)
The text contains a derogatory comment
towards Peruvians, using a vulgar and
discriminatory term. The final answer
is "racism."
The text refers to Peruvians as "gaver",
a derogatory term. The final answer is
"racism."
Mara Gómez: the story of the
first trans soccer player in the Argentine championship
It comes to bring what the team
lacks: goals and a lot of "eggs"
(in the sense of courage or bravery, refering to testicles. The
comment should be tagged as
LGBTI.)
The text praises Mara Gómez’s soccer
skills and mentions that she plans to contribute goals and effort to the team. It
does not contain hate speech or mention
any protected characteristics. The final
answer is "nothing."
The text alludes to Mara Gómez’s ability as a footballer, without making any
allusion to a protected characteristic. The
final answer is ’nothing’.
Tension in Villa Mascardi: Mapuches resist the eviction of a
usurped property.
How strange, [Joe] Lewis and the
millionaire squatters are not going to be evicted.
The text mentions the Mapuches in a
derogatory manner and suggests preferential treatment towards non-indigenous
occupants. Although protected characteristics are not directly mentioned, the
comment denotes prejudice towards the
Mapuche people. The final answer is
"racism."
The text compares the Mapuches with the
"millionaire squatters", suggesting that
they are equal. This shows contempt
for indigenous peoples and their fight for
their lands. The final answer is "racism."
Regional slangs and some cultural nuances detected by LLMs
Hebe de Bonafini4 criticized supermarkets and called for “replacing meat with rice, chickpeas and
lentils”
@usuario Old "chupa pi." ("pi."
stands for "pija" ("cock"), meaning "cocksucker"), you like "morcilla" (literaly "blood sausage",
but also "dick").
The text contains an insult towards Hebe
de Bonafini, calling her an "vieja chupa
pi." (old cocksucker), but also makes
derogatory reference to her diet, using
a sexist and vulgar comment. The final
answer is "woman."
The text insults Hebe de Bonafini by calling her a "vieja chupa pi." (old cocksucker), a derogatory expression. Additionally, she makes fun of her dietary preferences. The final answer is "woman."
China: another virus identified
“with the potential to become
pandemic” #NewVirus #China
First they morfan (Arg. lunf.
"eat") bats, now they must have
garchado (Arg. "fucked") a pig.
The text contains a derogatory comment
towards Chinese, alluding to their eating
habits and suggesting a repulsive sexual
intercourse with a pig. The final answer
is "racism".
The text shows contempt for Chinese culture and its relation to animals. The final
answer is "racism."
Table 7: Examples of LLMs results
ple, most explanations generated by LLMs were
correct, getting to detect difficult-to-tag messages
that were overlooked by the BETO classifier. Table
7 shows some examples of those cases.5
These results suggest that despite possible preconceptions about the lack of cultural grounding
of LLMs, they are somehow able to grasp cultural
nuances from Rioplatense Spanish and Argentinian
culture, even compared to fine-tuned BERT modeled to address that specific dialect. Some of the
examples in Table 7 show that LLMs, sometimes
are able to detect, explain, and provide information
about regional slang not detected by the fine-tuned
BETO classifier.
However, LLMs show a higher rate of false posi5The analysis is shown for GPT 3.5 and Mixtral (with the
benchmark of fine-tuned Beto), as Aya underperformed at this
task.
tives than the fine-tuned BETO classifier, when it
comes to the reference of majority-vote labels in
the dataset.6 This might indicate, first, that these
models are more sensitive to the presence of hate
speech and toxicity (probably due to preference
tuning or some other safety mechanisms ) and second, that the comparison against one single binary
label might not be the best way to evaluate these
models. Evaluating some of their explanations with
other metrics, such as human evaluation of soundness, informativeness, among others (Wang et al.,
2023), or also by using a perspectivist framework
taking into account the disagreement of the annotations (Sachdeva et al., 2022; Basile et al., 2021)
may provide a better comparison between these
6In the original dataset, each comment was annotated by
three annotators. Therefore, it was used a majority-vote label.

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: ¿More Rial found love in a per- | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in | Unnamed: 0 | The text refers to More Rial as "that one"
Row 1: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: sonal trainer? The mediatic | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: "horse", but also "dick") and | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: a derogatory way, using the term "pingo" | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": and accuses her of getting on a man beRow 2: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: shared a live broadcast with a | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: jumps on. | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: in a pejorative way to refer to a penis. The | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": cause of her physical attractiveness. This
Row 3: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: handsome personal trainer where | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: final answer is "woman". | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": is sexist and derogatory. The final answer
Row 4: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: they looked very intimate | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": is "woman".
Row 5: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: Mara Gómez: the story of the | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: Ponga huevos, Mara ponga | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: The text cheers Mara Gómez as a soccer | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": The text alludes to Mara Gómez’s lack
Row 6: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: first trans soccer player in the Ar- | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: huevos... (Eggs on [winning], | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: player, but she uses the expression "ponga | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": of "huevos", a term used to refer to the
Row 7: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: gentine championship | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: Mara, Eggs on! Here "eggs" | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: huevos" in a discriminatory way, with the | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": lack of courage or bravery. This is offenRow 8: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: stands for testicles) | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: aim of questioning her masculinity and | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": sive and derogatory. The final answer is
Row 9: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: her gender identity as a trans woman. The | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": "woman, LGBTI."
Row 10: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: final answer is "LGBTI". | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one":
Row 11: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: Incorrectly classified or incorrect explanations by LLMs | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one":
Row 12: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: British arrived in Peru for 10 | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: The Peruvian’s "gaver". Mother. | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: The text contains a derogatory comment | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": The text refers to Peruvians as "gaver",
Row 13: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: days and stayed for love: she | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: ("gaver" stands for "verga", | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: towards Peruvians, using a vulgar and | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": a derogatory term. The final answer is
Row 14: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: lives without safe water and | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: meaning dick. It is a sexist | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: discriminatory term. The final answer | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": "racism."
Row 15: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: among insects | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: comment, not racist) | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: is "racism." | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one":
Row 16: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: Mara Gómez: the story of the | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: It comes to bring what the team | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: The text praises Mara Gómez’s soccer | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": The text alludes to Mara Gómez’s abilRow 17: ¿More Rial found love in a per-: first trans soccer player in the Ar- | That one sees a pingo (Arg. for: lacks: goals and a lot of "eggs" | The text refers to More Rial’s sexuality in: skills and mentions that she plans to con- | Unnamed: 0: | The text refers to More Rial as "that one": ity as a footballer, without making any
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
models.
6 Conclusions
The culture and communication of Latin America
is diverse and full of different expressions, idioms,
slang, specific uses, and adaptations of, among others, the Spanish language, which embodies subtle
differences that are often context-dependent and
cannot be captured outside of their context of use.
We believe this work is a first step toward filling a
gap in resources regarding Rioplatense, a particular
variety of Spanish, and aims to contribute to the
understanding of how large language models perform in these specific, "under-resourced" language
varieties and their cultural contexts, which is particularly important when addressing the phenomenon
of hate speech.
This study shows the effectiveness of ChatGPT
and Mixtral classifiers in the task of hate speech
detection, specifically in the context of cultural
and linguistic complexities present in Rioplatense
Spanish tweets. The findings highlight that while
Mixtral excels in recall across various characteristics, it does so at the expense of precision. Conversely, ChatGPT offers a more balanced performance, particularly in detecting the LGBTI characteristic, where it outperforms traditional fine-tuned
classifiers, such as BETO. Comparing LLMs with
a state-of-the-art fine-tuned BETO classifier,ChatGPT and Mixtral showed a lower precision but a
higher recall in some categories, particularly in difficult cases that the supervised classifier was not
able to detect. These results underline the potential
for LLMs to capture cultural nuances and regional
expressions effectively and to interpret culturally
sensitive language rich with ironies and metaphors.
The results of ChatGPT to identify hate speech
laden with regionalisms show ability in processing
colloquial language. Notably, the prevalence of regional slurs in classist and misogynistic discourse
appears to indicate the importance of incorporating
regional context to improve hate speech detection.
However, the observed higher rate of false positives
in LLM classifications relative to BETO emphasizes the need for careful evaluation metrics when
assessing the efficacy of these models.
While LLMs have proven to be a powerful tool
for hate speech detection, supervised classifiers
still outperform them in the general case and are
more suitable for detecting hate speech at large
scale. Regarding cultural and linguistic nuances,
we found that LLMs were able to detect some of
them, but not all, missing some slurs, expressions
and insults typical of the Rioplatense dialect.
The insights from this study emphasize the importance of building models that are sensitive to
cultural and linguistic diversity, while also highlighting the value of producing corpora on specific topics and linguistic variants that serve as
benchmarks. In that sense, this paper contributes to
variant-focused research in NLP, being in this case
Rioplatense Spanish, underlining the importance
of a comprehensive understanding of variants, its
cultural nuances and language uses as a vital step
in addressing hate speech in a linguistically diverse
context.
7 Limitations
One of the main challenges faced in this work is related to the task itself: hate speech detection, which
tries to capture a complex social phenomenon. Additionally, it is important to note that the original
dataset lacked natural language explanations for
the annotations.
Also, the task of regionalism detection could be
enhanced, whether by human annotation or by dictionary enrichment, based on human annotations.
Finally, the analysis of LLMs explanations was
performed in a very limited way, being their soundness assessed solely by the authors. A deeper analysis of those explanations could be of interest, by
including larger samples, more annotators, and the
use of other metrics (such as informativeness).
8 Future work
As a future work, it would be interesting to develop
a multi-variant of Spanish evaluation, as this kind
of analytic effort and experiments were out of the
scope of this work at this stage. In particular, it
could be of interest to conduct similar experiments
with other Spanish variants, such as Iberian, where
there are more available corpora and/or Mexican
Spanish, which represents the major variant of spoken Spanish.
It also could be worthwhile to consider regional
specificity and/or contextual information, to distinguish text containing challenging elements, such
as wordplays, metaphors related to regional knowledge, idiomatic expressions, and instances of irony.
Taking that into account, would lead to better identification of regional terms, and future work could be
enhanced by exploring in depth different categories

[PAGE 9]
of hate speech and the specific use of slang and
colloquialisms tied to them. Along with this, future work could focus on improving the prompting
engineering to have a better handling of dialectal
variants.
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by funds for interdisciplinary projects evaluated and accredited
by the Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina
(PIUBA-2020-3; PIUBA-2022-04-02; PIUBA2023). The authors would like to thank to the research team members for their collaboration in previous work. They also thank the National Council
for Scientific and Technical Research (CONICET)
for their support. The authors are specially grateful
to the CCAD, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba,7
part of SNCAD–MinCyT, Argentina, for providing
access to the computational resources used in this
work.
References
Miguel Ángel Álvarez-Carmona, Estefanía GuzmánFalcón, Manuel Montes-y Gómez, Hugo Jair Escalante, Luis Villasenor Pineda, Verónica ReyesMeza, and Antonio Rico Sulayes. 2018. Overview
of mex-a3t at ibereval 2018: Authorship and aggressiveness analysis in mexican spanish tweets. In
IberEval@ SEPLN, pages 74–96.
Stavros Assimakopoulos, Fabienne H Baider, and
Sharon Millar. 2017. Online hate speech in the
European Union: a discourse-analytic perspective .
Springer Nature.
Valerio Basile, Cristina Bosco, Elisabetta Fersini, Debora Nozza, Viviana Patti, Francisco Manuel Rangel
Pardo, Paolo Rosso, and Manuela Sanguinetti. 2019.
Semeval-2019 task 5: Multilingual detection of hate
speech against immigrants and women in twitter. In
Proceedings of the 13th international workshop on
semantic evaluation, pages 54–63.
Valerio Basile, Michael Fell, Tommaso Fornaciari, Dirk
Hovy, Silviu Paun, Barbara Plank, Massimo Poesio,
and Alexandra Uma. 2021. We need to consider
disagreement in evaluation. In Proceedings of the
1st Workshop on Benchmarking: Past, Present and
Future, pages 15–21, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tamás Berecz and Charlotte Devinat. 2017. Relevance
of cyber hate in europe and current topics that shape
online hate speech. INACH, EU, 7:2020.
7https://ccad.unc.edu.ar/
Lukas Biewald. 2020. Experiment tracking with
weights and biases. Software available from
wandb.com.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 33:1877–1901.
Nur Bengisu Çam and Arzucan Özgür. 2023. Evaluation of chatgpt and bert-based models for turkish hate
speech detection. In 2023 8th International Conference on Computer Science and Engineering (UBMK),
pages 229–233. IEEE.
José Cañete, Gabriel Chaperon, Rodrigo Fuentes, JouHui Ho, Hojin Kang, and Jorge Pérez. 2020. Spanish Pre-Trained BERT Model and Evaluation Data.
PML4DC at ICLR.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret
Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al.
2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416.
Germán Coloma. 2018. Argentine spanish. Journal of
the International Phonetic Association, 48(2):243–
250.
Oscar Conde. 2013. Lunfardo rioplatense: delimitación,
descripción y evolución. De parces y troncos. Nuevos
enfoques sobre los argots hispánicos, pages 77–106.
Viviana Cotik, Natalia Debandi, Franco M. Luque,
Paula Miguel, Agustín Moro, Juan Manuel Pérez,
Pablo Serrati, Joaquin Zajac, and Demián Zayat.
2020. A study of hate speech in social media during
the COVID-19 outbreak.
Academia Argentina de Letras. 2003. Diccionario del
habla de los argentinos.
Jianyang Deng and Yijia Lin. 2022. The benefits and
challenges of chatgpt: An overview. Frontiers in
Computing and Intelligent Systems, 2(2):81–83.
Justina Diaz-Legaspe. 2020. What is a slur? Philosophical Studies, 177(5):1399–1422.
Eberhard, David M. and Simons, Gary F., and Fennig,
Charles D. 2024. Ethnologue: Languages of the
World. "Dallas, Texas: SIL International.".
Karmen Erjavec and Melita Poler Kovaˇciˇc. 2012. “you
don’t understand, this is a new war!” analysis of
hate speech in news web sites’ comments. Mass
Communication and Society, 15(6):899–920.
Luciana Ferrer and Pablo Riera. 2023. Confidence Intervals for evaluation in machine learning. Originaldate: 2023-12-06T12:26:21Z.

[PAGE 10]
Elisabetta Fersini, Paolo Rosso, Maria Anzovino, et al.
2018. Overview of the task on automatic misogyny identification at ibereval 2018. Ibereval@ sepln,
2150:214–228.
Paula Fortuna and Sérgio Nunes. 2018. A survey on
automatic detection of hate speech in text. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(4):1–30.
Varun Godbole, George E. Dahl, Justin Gilmer, Christopher J. Shallue, and Zachary Nado. 2023. Deep learning tuning playbook. Version 1.
Suchin Gururangan, Ana Marasovi ´c, Swabha
Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey,
and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Don’t Stop Pretraining:
Adapt Language Models to Domains and Tasks.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
8342–8360, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Edwin Hodge and Helga Kristín Hallgrímsdóttir. 2021.
Networks of hate: the alt-right,“troll culture”, and
the cultural geography of social movement spaces online. In British Columbia’s Borders in Globalization,
pages 102–119. Routledge.
Fan Huang, Haewoon Kwak, and Jisun An. 2023. Is
chatgpt better than human annotators? potential and
limitations of chatgpt in explaining implicit hate
speech. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web
Conference 2023, pages 294–297.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine
Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris
Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las
Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, MarieAnne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian,
Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao,
Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang,
Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2024. Mixtral of Experts.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980.
John M Lipski. 2012. Geographical and social varieties
of spanish: An overview. The handbook of Hispanic
linguistics, pages 1–26.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika,
Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le Scao,
M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, Xiangru Tang, Dragomir Radev,
Alham Fikri Aji, Khalid Almubarak, Samuel Albanie, Zaid Alyafeai, Albert Webson, Edward Raff,
and Colin Raffel. 2023. Crosslingual generalization through multitask finetuning. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 15991–16111, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Geoffrey Nunberg. 2018. The social life of slurs. New
work on speech acts, pages 237–295.
Amanda S Oliveira, Thiago C Cecote, Pedro HL Silva,
Jadson C Gertrudes, Vander LS Freitas, and Eduardo JS Luz. 2023. How good is chatgpt for detecting hate speech in portuguese? In Anais do XIV
Simpósio Brasileiro de Tecnologia da Informação e
da Linguagem Humana, pages 94–103. SBC.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744.
María Antonia Paz, Julio Montero-Díaz,
and Alicia Moreno-Delgado. 2020. Hate
speech: A systematized review. Sage Open ,
10(4):2158244020973022.
Juan Manuel Pérez, Damián Ariel Furman,
Laura Alonso Alemany, and Franco M Luque.
2022. Robertuito: a pre-trained language model
for social media text in spanish. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, pages 7235–7243.
Juan Manuel Pérez, Franco M Luque, Demian Zayat,
Martín Kondratzky, Agustín Moro, Pablo Santiago
Serrati, Joaquín Zajac, Paula Miguel, Natalia Debandi, Agustín Gravano, et al. 2023. Assessing the
impact of contextual information in hate speech detection. IEEE Access, 11:30575–30590.
Flor Miriam Plaza-del arco, Debora Nozza, and Dirk
Hovy. 2023. Respectful or toxic? using zero-shot
learning with language models to detect hate speech.
In The 7th Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms
(WOAH), pages 60–68, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Fabio Poletto, Valerio Basile, Manuela Sanguinetti,
Cristina Bosco, and Viviana Patti. 2021. Resources
and benchmark corpora for hate speech detection: a
systematic review. Language Resources and Evaluation, 55(2):477–523.
Presidencia de la Nación. 2006. Hacia un plan nacional
contra la discriminación “. Boletín Oficial, 30.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the
limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
21(140):1–67.
Pratik Sachdeva, Renata Barreto, Geoff Bacon, Alexander Sahn, Claudia von Vacano, and Chris Kennedy.
2022. The measuring hate speech corpus: Leveraging rasch measurement theory for data perspectivism.
In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Perspectivist
Approaches to NLP @LREC2022, pages 83–94, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association.

[PAGE 11]
Maarten Sap, Saadia Gabriel, Lianhui Qin, Dan Jurafsky, Noah A Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Social
bias frames: Reasoning about social and power implications of language. In Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 5477–5490.
Anna Schmidt and Michael Wiegand. 2017. A survey
on hate speech detection using natural language processing. In Proceedings of the fifth international
workshop on natural language processing for social
media, pages 1–10.
Amit Sheth, Valerie L Shalin, and Ugur Kursuncu.
2022. Defining and detecting toxicity on social media: context and knowledge are key. Neurocomputing, 490:312–318.
Alice Tontodimamma, Eugenia Nissi, Annalina Sarra,
and Lara Fontanella. 2021. Thirty years of research
into hate speech: topics of interest and their evolution.
Scientometrics, 126:157–179.
Ahmet Üstün, Viraat Aryabumi, Zheng-Xin Yong, WeiYin Ko, Daniel D’souza, Gbemileke Onilude, Neel
Bhandari, Shivalika Singh, Hui-Lee Ooi, Amr Kayid,
Freddie Vargus, Phil Blunsom, Shayne Longpre,
Niklas Muennighoff, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer,
and Sara Hooker. 2024. Aya Model: An Instruction Finetuned Open-Access Multilingual Language
Model.
Han Wang, Ming Shan Hee, Md Rabiul Awal, Kenny
Tsu Wei Choo, and Roy Ka-Wei Lee. 2023. Evaluating gpt-3 generated explanations for hateful content
moderation. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-23, pages 6255–6263. International
Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. AI for Good.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu,
Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M
Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2021. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837.
Heather Suzanne Woods and Leslie A Hahner. 2019.
Make America meme again: The rhetoric of the AltRight. Peter Lang New York.
Tianyu Wu, Shizhu He, Jingping Liu, Siqi Sun, Kang
Liu, Qing-Long Han, and Yang Tang. 2023. A brief
overview of chatgpt: The history, status quo and
potential future development. IEEE/CAA Journal of
Automatica Sinica, 10(5):1122–1136.
Alexandros Xenos, John Pavlopoulos, and Ion Androutsopoulos. 2021. Context sensitivity estimation in
toxicity detection. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms (WOAH 2021) ,
pages 140–145, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mesay Gemeda Yigezu, Olga Kolesnikova, Grigori Sidorov, and Alexander F Gelbukh. 2023.
Transformer-based hate speech detection for multiclass and multi-label classification. In IberLEF@
SEPLN.
Savvas Zannettou, Mai ElSherief, Elizabeth Belding,
Shirin Nilizadeh, and Gianluca Stringhini. 2020.
Measuring and characterizing hate speech on news
websites. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference
on web science, pages 125–134.
A Appendix
In this appendix, we present the definition of each
targeted class of hate speech and we describe details of the original prompt and instruction provided
to the LLMs
A.1 Classes Definition
Definition of each class addressed in hate speech
detection according to the Plan Nacional contra la Discriminación (Argentinean National Plan
Against Discrimination) guidelines (Presidencia de
la Nación, 2006).
A.1.1 RACISM
Racism can be defined as a set of beliefs, attitudes
and practices that discriminate against individuals
or groups based on their race, ethnicity, or physical characteristics, denying them equal rights and
dignity. This discrimination can be both individual
and institutional and can occur in various ways:
Individual racism; Institutional racism; Structural
racism; Cultural racism; Xenophobia (rejection or
fear of people from other countries or cultures);
and also includes Antisemitism, Arabophobia, Islamophobia and Afrophobia.
A.1.2 WOMEN
Discrimination against women is a social phenomenon that manifests itself as a set of actions
and beliefs that devalue women compared to men,
through attitudes, practices and structures that perpetuate gender inequality and limit women’s access to resources, rights and opportunities in various areas of life. Discrimination against women
can be expressed in different areas, such as Economic Inequality; Gender Violence; Access to Education; Political Representation; Cultural Norms
and Stereotypes; among others. Added to this is intersectional discrimination (women who belong to

[PAGE 12]
minority groups may experience additional forms
of discrimination, which further complicates their
situation).
A.1.3 LGBTI
Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, behaviors, and policies that marginalize and devalue
people based on their sexual orientation or gender identity. This form of discrimination manifests itself in various dimensions and contexts, affecting the daily lives and fundamental rights of
LGBTQ+ people. Gender-based discrimination
can be expressed as violence and harassment; legal inequality; social stigmatization; unequal access to services; non-positive media representation;
among others. Likewise, gender-based discrimination can intersect with other forms of discrimination, such as racism or poverty, exacerbating
the difficulties faced by individuals belonging to
multiple marginalized groups.
A.1.4 CLASS
Class-based discrimination refers to attitudes, practices, and social structures that marginalize people
based on their socioeconomic status/poverty. This
form of discrimination manifests itself in various
dimensions, affecting access to resources, rights,
and opportunities, and perpetuating social exclusion. Expressing itself, for example, as Limited
Access to Resources; Social Stigmatization; Labor
Inequality; Violence and Crime; Lack of Political Representation, among others. Furthermore,
class-based discrimination can intersect with other
forms of discrimination, such as racism or sexism,
exacerbating the difficulties faced by individuals
belonging to multiple marginalized groups.
A.2 Original prompt and examples
In this subsection, we present the original prompt
and the provided examples for the few-shot
scenario, both in Spanish. Instrucción stands for
Instruction, Ejemplos for Example, Contexto, Texto
and Salida for Context, Text, and Output.
Instrucción: "Determinar si el siguiente texto,
correspondiente a un tweet y presentado con un
contexto, contiene discurso de odio. Entendemos
que hay discurso de odio si tiene declaraciones de
carácter intenso y/o irracional de rechazo, enemistad o aborrecimiento contra un individuo o contra
un grupo, siendo el individuo o el grupo objetivo
de las expresiones por poseer una característica
protegida. Las características protegidas que contemplamos son:
• mujer: hace referencia a mujeres o al
movimiento feminista.
• lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, transexuales y otras identidades de género.
• racismo: hace referencia a inmigrantes, xenofobia, o a pueblos aborígenes.
• clase: hace referencia a personas de bajos
recursos o motivos de clase.
Los tweets están escritos en español rioplatense,
y dentro del contexto cultural de Argentina. Responder una o varias de las características separadas por coma, o bien "nada" si no hay discurso
de odio. Pensar y justificar paso a paso la respuesta
antes de responder."
Ejemplos:
contexto: ’Wuhan celebra el fin de la
cuarentena por el coronavirus con un
mensaje para el resto del mundo: "Aprendan de nuestros errores"’
texto: "Chinos culiados de mierda ojalá
se mueran todos"
salida: ’El texto insulta a los chinos
("culiados") y desea que se mueran,
implicando que son los culpables del
COVID-19. La respuesta final es
"racismo".’
contexto:"Al borde del llanto, Nati Jota
pidió disculpas por sus repudiables tuits pero los justificó: ’Quería sumar
seguidores’"
texto: "Show o nada mi amorrr!! Sos
una imbesil!"
salida: ’El texto contiene un insulto
pero no menciona nada relacionado a
las características protegidas, pese a
mencionar a una mujer. La respuesta
final es "nada".’
contexto:’Funcionario público y drag
queen: la "doble vida" del político que
representa a Salta en tacos, peluca y
barba con brillos’,
texto: "Que asco..!’",

[TABLE page=12 index=1]
Columns: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tranRow 1: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: haviors, and policies that marginalize and devalue | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: sexuales y otras identidades de género.
Row 2: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: people based on their sexual orientation or gen- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 3: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: der identity. This form of discrimination mani- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: • racismo: hace referencia a inmigrantes, xenoRow 4: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: fests itself in various dimensions and contexts, af- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: fobia, o a pueblos aborígenes.
Row 5: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: fecting the daily lives and fundamental rights of | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 6: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: • clase: hace referencia a personas de bajos
Row 7: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: LGBTQ+ people. Gender-based discrimination | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 8: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: recursos o motivos de clase.
Row 9: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: can be expressed as violence and harassment; le- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 10: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: gal inequality; social stigmatization; unequal ac- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: Los tweets están escritos en español rioplatense,
Row 11: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: cess to services; non-positive media representation; | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: y dentro del contexto cultural de Argentina. ReRow 12: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: among others. Likewise, gender-based discrimi- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: sponder una o varias de las características sepaRow 13: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: nation can intersect with other forms of discrim- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: radas por coma, o bien "nada" si no hay discurso
Row 14: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: ination, such as racism or poverty, exacerbating | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: de odio. Pensar y justificar paso a paso la respuesta
Row 15: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: the difficulties faced by individuals belonging to | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: antes de responder."
Row 16: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: multiple marginalized groups. | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: Ejemplos:
Row 17: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: A.1.4 CLASS | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: contexto: ’Wuhan celebra el fin de la
Row 18: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: Class-based discrimination refers to attitudes, prac- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: cuarentena por el coronavirus con un
Row 19: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: tices, and social structures that marginalize people | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: mensaje para el resto del mundo: "AprenRow 20: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: based on their socioeconomic status/poverty. This | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: dan de nuestros errores"’
Row 21: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: form of discrimination manifests itself in various | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: texto: "Chinos culiados de mierda ojalá
Row 22: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: dimensions, affecting access to resources, rights, | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: se mueran todos"
Row 23: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: and opportunities, and perpetuating social exclu- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 24: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: salida: ’El texto insulta a los chinos
Row 25: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: sion. Expressing itself, for example, as Limited | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 26: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: ("culiados") y desea que se mueran,
Row 27: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: Access to Resources; Social Stigmatization; Labor | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 28: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: implicando que son los culpables del
Row 29: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: Inequality; Violence and Crime; Lack of Politi- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 30: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: COVID-19. La respuesta final es
Row 31: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: cal Representation, among others. Furthermore, | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 32: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: "racismo".’
Row 33: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: class-based discrimination can intersect with other | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 34: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: forms of discrimination, such as racism or sexism, | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 35: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: exacerbating the difficulties faced by individuals | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: contexto:"Al borde del llanto, Nati Jota
Row 36: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: belonging to multiple marginalized groups. | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: pidió disculpas por sus repudiables tuRow 37: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: its pero los justificó: ’Quería sumar
Row 38: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: A.2 Original prompt and examples | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: seguidores’"
Row 39: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: In this subsection, we present the original prompt | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: texto: "Show o nada mi amorrr!! Sos
Row 40: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: and the provided examples for the few-shot | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: una imbesil!"
Row 41: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: scenario, both in Spanish. Instrucción stands for | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 42: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: salida: ’El texto contiene un insulto
Row 43: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: Instruction, Ejemplos for Example, Contexto, Texto | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 44: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: pero no menciona nada relacionado a
Row 45: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: and Salida for Context, Text, and Output. | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 46: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: las características protegidas, pese a
Row 47: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: mencionar a una mujer. La respuesta
Row 48: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: Instrucción: "Determinar si el siguiente texto, | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 49: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: final es "nada".’
Row 50: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: correspondiente a un tweet y presentado con un | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 51: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: contexto, contiene discurso de odio. Entendemos | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-:
Row 52: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: que hay discurso de odio si tiene declaraciones de | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: contexto:’Funcionario público y drag
Row 53: Gender-based discrimination refers to attitudes, be-: carácter intenso y/o irracional de rechazo, enemis- | • lgbti: hace referencia a gays, lesbianas, tran-: queen: la "doble vida" del político que
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 13]
salida:’El texto expresa desagrado hacia
la identidad de género de la persona. La
respuesta final es "lgbti"
contexto: "Violento motín en la cárcel
de Devoto: tomaron e incendiaron pabellones",
texto: "Hermanito lo que son esos
grones. Ahí adentro le robaron la billetera al coronavirus"
salida: ’El texto utiliza la palabra
"grones", que significa negros (se
obtiene "grones" a partir de "negros"
cambiando el orden de las sílabas).
Negro o grone es una manera despectiva
de refererirse a alguien por su color de
piel. Además, da a entender que los
presos son ladrones. La respuesta final
es "racismo".’
context:’Mayra Mendoza criticó el banderazo contra el Gobierno: "No tiene sentido y es antidemocrático"’
text: "Que negrita villera....ni con la
plata q roba puede arreglarse"
output: ’El texto alude al color de piel
de Mayra Mendoza ("negrita") y a su
condición social ("villera") de manera
discriminatoria. La respuesta final es
"racismo, clase".’
context: "No da tregua: sin ropa y desafiante Flor Peña volvió a mostrar su
lado más hot"
text: "K lado hot tiene más varices k mi
abuela. Tiene mas puesta de espalda k
karagian trola"
output: ’El texto alude al aspecto de
Flor Peña (sus várices) y la desprecia
por "trola", un insulto que significa
"prostituta". La respuesta final es
"mujer".’
context: "Otro ataque de furia contra un
colectivero: una mujer trans le pateó la
unidad y le tiró un ladrillazo"
text: "Un tipo operado. Con la fuerza de
un hombre y no la de una mujer"
output: "salida": ’El texto asegura que
la mujer trans es "un tipo operado",
implicando que en los hechos es un
hombre y negando su identidad de
género. La respuesta final es "lgbti"’
context:’Elisa Carrió denunció que el
Gobierno usa la pandemia para "establecer un estado de sitio"’
text: "Gorda psiquiátrica"
output: ’El texto habla de su aspecto
(gorda) y la acusa de tener problemas
psiquiátricos. Sin embargo, no hace
ninguna alusión a una característica
protegida. La respuesta final es "nada".
context: ’Loly Antoniale mostró su impresionante casa en Miami: "Soy la reina
de mi castillo"’
text: "No pudo enganchar al viejo
famoso..se busco otro..y este le puso su
castillo en Miami..."
output: ’El texto alude a la vida amorosa
de Loly Antoniale, sugiriendo que busca
hombres por interés económico. Esta
apreciación es sexista y despectiva. La
respuesta final es "mujer".’
context: "Les darán DNI provisorio a
personas en situación vulnerable, para
que puedan empezar a cobrar planes sociales"
text: "Seguimos alimentando vagos"
output: ’El texto se refiere a quienes
cobran planes sociales como vagos a
quienes hay que alimentar. Esto muestra
un desprecio hacia las clases bajas que
requieren de la asistencia estatal. La
respuesta final es "clase".’
context: "Los dos presos heridos de bala
en el motín de Devoto tienen Covid-19 y
uno quedó hemipléjico"
text: "justicia divina!"
output: "salida": "El comentario contiene una celebración frente a un ataque
a presos. A pesar de ser sumamente
ofensivo, no hace ninguna alusión a una

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: text: "Que | negrita | villera....ni | con | la | Unnamed: 0 | de Loly Antoniale, sugiriendo que busca
Row 1: text: "Que: plata q roba puede arreglarse" | negrita: | villera....ni: | con: | la: | Unnamed: 0: | de Loly Antoniale, sugiriendo que busca: hombres por interés económico. Esta
Row 2: text: "Que: output: ’El texto alude al color de piel | negrita: | villera....ni: | con: | la: | Unnamed: 0: | de Loly Antoniale, sugiriendo que busca: apreciación es sexista y despectiva. La
Row 3: text: "Que: de Mayra Mendoza | negrita: | villera....ni: ("negrita") | con: y a | la: su | Unnamed: 0: | de Loly Antoniale, sugiriendo que busca: respuesta final es "mujer".’
Row 4: text: "Que: condición social | negrita: ("villera") de manera | villera....ni: | con: | la: | Unnamed: 0: | de Loly Antoniale, sugiriendo que busca:
Row 5: text: "Que: discriminatoria. | negrita: La | villera....ni: respuesta final | con: | la: es | Unnamed: 0: | de Loly Antoniale, sugiriendo que busca: context: "Les darán DNI provisorio a
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 14]
característica protegida. La respuesta
final es ’nada’."