[PAGE 1]
Boosting the Capabilities of Compact Models in Low-Data Contexts
with Large Language Models and Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Bhargav Shandilya and Alexis Palmer
University of Colorado Boulder
{bhargav.shandilya,alexis.palmer}@colorado.edu
Abstract
The data and compute requirements of current
language modeling technology pose challenges
for the processing and analysis of low-resource
languages. Declarative linguistic knowledge
has the potential to partially bridge this data
scarcity gap by providing models with useful
inductive bias in the form of language-specific
rules. In this paper, we propose a retrieval augmented generation (RAG) framework backed
by a large language model (LLM) to correct the
output of a smaller model for the linguistic task
of morphological glossing. We leverage linguistic information to make up for the lack of
data and trainable parameters, while allowing
for inputs from written descriptive grammars
interpreted and distilled through an LLM.
The results demonstrate that significant leaps
in performance and efficiency are possible with
the right combination of: a) linguistic inputs in
the form of grammars, b) the interpretive power
of LLMs, and c) the trainability of smaller token classification networks. We show that a
compact, RAG-supported model is highly effective in data-scarce settings, achieving a new
state-of-the-art for this task and our target languages. Our work also offers documentary linguists a more reliable and more usable tool
for morphological glossing by providing wellreasoned explanations and confidence scores
for each output. 1
1 Introduction
Over the last decade, language models have
evolved rapidly, culminating in impressively
domain-agnostic decoder-only models like GPT
(Brown et al., 2020) and Llama 2 (Touvron et al.,
2023). Although these models can be versatile
in terms of being applicable to a wide variety of
tasks and providing straightforward interfaces for
1Code and data samples are available and will be released
upon publication.
Figure 1: One Uspanteko sentence, with its original
gloss, a predicted gloss, and an explanation from our
IGT-RAG model. For each morpheme in the sentence,
the model describes which section of the provided Uspanteko grammar it used to make its labeling decision.
quick inference, the fact remains that they are extremely parameter-heavy, making them difficult
and expensive to train (Bender and Koller, 2020).
LLMs, however, give us a unique descriptive power
that can boost explainability when used in certain
contexts. In this paper, we examine how LLMs
can be used to make RAG-informed corrections
for the task of morpheme glossing (Section 2.1),
a crucial and time-intensive part of the workflow
of documenting endangered languages. Retrieval
augmented generation (RAG) incorporates an initial retrieval step, where LLMs query an external
data source to gather relevant information before
generating answers or text. This retrieval phase not
only informs the subsequent generation process but
also ensures that the responses are based on solid
evidence, thereby improving the accuracy and relevance of the output. Figure 1 shows an example of
one sentence from the Mayan language Uspanteko,
its true and predicted morpheme glosses, and the
arXiv:2410.00387v1 [cs.CL] 1 Oct 2024

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: in performance and efficiency are possible with | the model describes which section of the provided UsRow 1: in performance and efficiency are possible with: the right combination of: a) linguistic inputs in | the model describes which section of the provided Us-: panteko grammar it used to make its labeling decision.
Row 2: in performance and efficiency are possible with: the form of grammars, b) the interpretive power | the model describes which section of the provided Us-:
Row 3: in performance and efficiency are possible with: of LLMs, and c) the trainability of smaller to- | the model describes which section of the provided Us-:
Row 4: in performance and efficiency are possible with: ken classification networks. We show that a | the model describes which section of the provided Us-: quick inference, the fact remains that they are ex-
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=1 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Abstract | Unnamed: 1
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: The data and compute requirements of current | Unnamed: 1:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: language modeling technology pose challenges | Unnamed: 1:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: for the processing and analysis of low-resource | Unnamed: 1:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: languages. Declarative linguistic knowledge | Unnamed: 1:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: has the potential to partially bridge this data | Unnamed: 1:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: scarcity gap by providing models with useful | Unnamed: 1:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: inductive bias in the form of language-specific | Unnamed: 1:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: rules. In this paper, we propose a retrieval aug- | Unnamed: 1:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: mented generation (RAG) framework backed | Unnamed: 1:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: by a large language model (LLM) to correct the | Unnamed: 1:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: output of a smaller model for the linguistic task | Unnamed: 1:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: of morphological glossing. We leverage lin- | Unnamed: 1:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: guistic information to make up for the lack of | Unnamed: 1:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: data and trainable parameters, while allowing | Unnamed: 1:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: for inputs from written descriptive grammars | Unnamed: 1: Figure 1: One Uspanteko sentence, with its original
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: interpreted and distilled through an LLM. | Unnamed: 1: gloss, a predicted gloss, and an explanation from our
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: The results demonstrate that significant leaps | Unnamed: 1: IGT-RAG model. For each morpheme in the sentence,
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: in performance and efficiency are possible with | Unnamed: 1: the model describes which section of the provided UsRow 19: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: the right combination of: a) linguistic inputs in | Unnamed: 1: panteko grammar it used to make its labeling decision.
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: the form of grammars, b) the interpretive power | Unnamed: 1:
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: of LLMs, and c) the trainability of smaller to- | Unnamed: 1:
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: ken classification networks. We show that a | Unnamed: 1: quick inference, the fact remains that they are exRow 23: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: compact, RAG-supported model is highly ef- | Unnamed: 1: tremely parameter-heavy, making them difficult
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: fective in data-scarce settings, achieving a new | Unnamed: 1:
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: and expensive to train (Bender and Koller, 2020).
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: state-of-the-art for this task and our target lan- | Unnamed: 1:
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: LLMs, however, give us a unique descriptive power
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: guages. Our work also offers documentary lin- | Unnamed: 1:
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: guists a more reliable and more usable tool | Unnamed: 1: that can boost explainability when used in certain
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: for morphological glossing by providing well- | Unnamed: 1: contexts. In this paper, we examine how LLMs
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: reasoned explanations and confidence scores | Unnamed: 1: can be used to make RAG-informed corrections
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: for each output. 1 | Unnamed: 1: for the task of morpheme glossing (Section 2.1),
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: a crucial and time-intensive part of the workflow
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: 1 | Abstract: Introduction | Unnamed: 1: of documenting endangered languages. Retrieval
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: augmented generation (RAG) incorporates an iniRow 36: Unnamed: 0: Over | Abstract: the last decade, language models have | Unnamed: 1:
Row 37: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: tial retrieval step, where LLMs query an external
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: evolved | Abstract: rapidly, culminating in impressively | Unnamed: 1:
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: data source to gather relevant information before
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: domain-agnostic decoder-only models | Abstract: like GPT | Unnamed: 1:
Row 41: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: generating answers or text. This retrieval phase not
Row 42: Unnamed: 0: (Brown et al., 2020) and Llama 2 (Touvron et al., | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 43: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: only informs the subsequent generation process but
Row 44: Unnamed: 0: 2023). | Abstract: Although these models can be versatile | Unnamed: 1:
Row 45: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: also ensures that the responses are based on solid
Row 46: Unnamed: 0: in terms of being applicable to a wide variety of | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 47: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: evidence, thereby improving the accuracy and releRow 48: Unnamed: 0: tasks and providing straightforward interfaces for | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 49: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: vance of the output. Figure 1 shows an example of
Row 50: Unnamed: 0: | Abstract: 1Code and data samples are available and will be released | Unnamed: 1: one sentence from the Mayan language Uspanteko,
Row 51: Unnamed: 0: upon publication. | Abstract: | Unnamed: 1: its true and predicted morpheme glosses, and the
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
explanations produced by our RAG pipeline. We
test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs
- Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2024) and GPT-4
(Achiam et al., 2023). In our experiments, Claude3.5-Sonnet gives the most promising outputs, with
both word and morpheme-level accuracies improving significantly over baselines for Uspanteko and
Arapaho.
LLMs also come with a known limitation: they
are inherently data-hungry, relying on vast amounts
of training data to achieve their impressive performance (Holmström et al., 2023). This characteristic
makes them less effective when dealing with small
datasets, particularly prevalent in low-resource language contexts such as supporting documentation
of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,
tailor-made models seem to be preferred, offering
better computational efficiency and flexibility.
In this paper, we specifically focus on the lowresource Uspanteko and Arapaho languages (Section 4) as we have author-approved access to grammar resources and data for these languages. Our
approach leverages the knowledge encapsulated in
large models combined with these digitized grammars. In Reid et al. (2024), Google’s Gemini team
demonstrated that they could fit an entire grammar
for a low-resource language (Kalamang) in a single
prompt owing to the massive context window size
of Gemini 1.5.
While this zero-shot setting may work well for
individual inputs, it is important to remember that
the model must process the full grammar each time
it receives a new prompt.
It is more computationally efficient and costeffective to retrieve only the parts of the grammar
most relevant to the given query.
The RAG pipeline has been well-established for
question-answering tasks, and this paper explores
the capacity of LLMs to retrieve, interpret, and use
only the relevant, retrieved parts of the grammar in
a zero-shot setting to correct the output of a smaller
model.
The process is not just about size reduction; it’s
a strategic transfer of linguistic capabilities, ensuring that the compact model inherits the teacher’s
strengths while remaining resource-efficient. In
our baseline experimental setting, we simply call
the LLM at inference time to correct the output
of the smaller token classification network. Experimenting further, we fine-tune the retrieval and
re-ranking components in conjunction with the token classification model to boost performance.
Furthermore, large language models can be
prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei
et al., 2023), an approach with immense benefits
for model explainability. Apart from correcting the
output, we also generate a JSON object that contains descriptions of which chunks were retrieved,
how these chunks informed the final output, and the
level of confidence the pipeline has in its final predictions. As seen in figure 1, the LLM-generated
explanations of the results and how RAG was used
to achieve them are (largely) coherent and contextually relevant.
Our specific contributions include (1) development of a RAG pipeline to correct the predictions
of a smaller model, (2) improving the usability of
NLP models for language documentation by eliciting confidence scores and explanations for each
prediction, (3) demonstration of significant performance improvements in low-resource language
processing and a new SOTA for this task, and (4) a
scalable approach that balances computational efficiency with linguistic accuracy and explainability.
2 Background and Related Work
2.1 The glossing task
The specific task we address in this paper is morphological glossing, a component of the automatic
production of interlinear glossed text (IGT). IGT
is a richly-annotated data format widely used in
linguistics, especially as one product of work documenting and describing endangered languages.
The data format, an example of which appears
below, consists of multiple interrelated tiers containing different types of linguistic information.
This Uspanteko example is representative of a common IGT configuration, with one tier for the original utterance, one for a morphological segmentation, one for a detailed labeling of the component
morphemes, and one line with a translation into a
language of wider communication.
(1) xqil
x-∅-q-il
COM-A3S-E1P-ver
‘lo vimos’ (‘we saw it’)
We focus specifically on the glossline, in which
we see a mix of stem translations (e.g. ver (in
English, to see ) for the Uspanteko stem il) and
labels indicating morphosyntactic functions (e.g.
COM indicates marking of completive aspect on
the verb stem). Glossing is a sequence-to-sequence

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei
Row 1: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs: - Claude 3.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2024) and GPT-4 | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei: et al., 2023), an approach with immense benefits
Row 2: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs: (Achiam et al., 2023). In our experiments, Claude- | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei: for model explainability. Apart from correcting the
Row 3: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs: 3.5-Sonnet gives the most promising outputs, with | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei: output, we also generate a JSON object that conRow 4: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs: both word and morpheme-level accuracies improv- | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei: tains descriptions of which chunks were retrieved,
Row 5: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs: ing significantly over baselines for Uspanteko and | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei: how these chunks informed the final output, and the
Row 6: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs: Arapaho. | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei: level of confidence the pipeline has in its final preRow 7: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs: LLMs also come with a known limitation: they | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei: dictions. As seen in figure 1, the LLM-generated
Row 8: test and compare the efficacy of two popular LLMs: are inherently data-hungry, relying on vast amounts | prompted to explain their chain-of-thought (Wei: explanations of the results and how RAG was used
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=2 index=2]
Columns: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner, | NLP models for language documentation by elicRow 1: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: tailor-made models seem to be preferred, offering | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: iting confidence scores and explanations for each
Row 2: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: better computational efficiency and flexibility. | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: prediction, (3) demonstration of significant perRow 3: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: In this paper, we specifically focus on the low- | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: formance improvements in low-resource language
Row 4: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: resource Uspanteko and Arapaho languages (Sec- | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: processing and a new SOTA for this task, and (4) a
Row 5: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: tion 4) as we have author-approved access to gram- | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: scalable approach that balances computational effiRow 6: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: mar resources and data for these languages. Our | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: ciency with linguistic accuracy and explainability.
Row 7: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: approach leverages the knowledge encapsulated in | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 8: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: large models combined with these digitized gram- | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: 2 Background and Related Work
Row 9: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: mars. In Reid et al. (2024), Google’s Gemini team | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: 2.1 The glossing task
Row 10: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: demonstrated that they could fit an entire grammar | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 11: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: The specific task we address in this paper is morRow 12: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: for a low-resource language (Kalamang) in a single | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 13: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: phological glossing, a component of the automatic
Row 14: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: prompt owing to the massive context window size | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 15: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: production of interlinear glossed text (IGT). IGT
Row 16: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: of Gemini 1.5. | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 17: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: is a richly-annotated data format widely used in
Row 18: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: While this zero-shot setting may work well for | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 19: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: linguistics, especially as one product of work docuRow 20: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: individual inputs, it is important to remember that | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 21: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: menting and describing endangered languages.
Row 22: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: the model must process the full grammar each time | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 23: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: The data format, an example of which appears
Row 24: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: it receives a new prompt. | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 25: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: below, consists of multiple interrelated tiers conRow 26: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: It is more computationally efficient and cost- | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 27: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: taining different types of linguistic information.
Row 28: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: effective to retrieve only the parts of the grammar | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 29: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: This Uspanteko example is representative of a comRow 30: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: most relevant to the given query. | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 31: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: mon IGT configuration, with one tier for the origRow 32: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: The RAG pipeline has been well-established for | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 33: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: inal utterance, one for a morphological segmentaRow 34: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: question-answering tasks, and this paper explores | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 35: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: tion, one for a detailed labeling of the component
Row 36: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: the capacity of LLMs to retrieve, interpret, and use | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 37: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: morphemes, and one line with a translation into a
Row 38: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: only the relevant, retrieved parts of the grammar in | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 39: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: language of wider communication.
Row 40: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: a zero-shot setting to correct the output of a smaller | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 41: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: model. | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 42: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: (1) xqil
Row 43: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: The process is not just about size reduction; it’s | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: x-∅-q-il
Row 44: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: a strategic transfer of linguistic capabilities, ensur- | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: COM-A3S-E1P-ver
Row 45: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: ing that the compact model inherits the teacher’s | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: ‘lo vimos’ (‘we saw it’)
Row 46: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: strengths while remaining resource-efficient. In | NLP models for language documentation by elic-:
Row 47: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: our baseline experimental setting, we simply call | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: We focus specifically on the glossline, in which
Row 48: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: the LLM at inference time to correct the output | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: we see a mix of stem translations (e.g. ver (in
Row 49: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: of the smaller token classification network. Ex- | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: English, to see) for the Uspanteko stem il) and
Row 50: of endangered languages. In these scenarios, leaner,: perimenting further, we fine-tune the retrieval and | NLP models for language documentation by elic-: labels indicating morphosyntactic functions (e.g.
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
problem that can be approached in 2 ways. The
first approach is to train a model to segment the
data and then view it as a token classification task.
The second is to view it as a translation problem
with uneven input and output lengths, thus requiring an encoder-decoder model that can perform
sequence-to-sequence conversion. In this paper,
we use the former approach. The IGT task was the
focus of a SIGMORPHON 2023 shared task. The
task, resources, and previous models are described
in detail in Ginn et al. (2023).
We directly use the segmented data in track 2 of
the Sigmorphon 2023 glossing shared task to train
our compact model. The corrective LLM only sees
the segmented output of the compact model and
the unsegmented text in the training data.2
2.2 Related Work
Analyses like those by Conneau et al. (2020) reveal the inadequacies of large language models in
capturing the nuances of less-common languages.
These studies underline the necessity for specialized models that cater to the unique characteristics of low-resource languages. Furthermore, position papers like Bender and Koller (2020) critically
analyze the bias and limitations in LLMs, advocating for more inclusive and adaptable language
technologies. Another interesting approach to incorporating linguistic information is described in
Tziafas et al. (2023). They directly apply syntactic supervision at the pre-training stage to enhance
the model with syntactic awareness. While this approach shows promising results, pre-training again
requires large amounts of labeled data which is not
available in a low resource setting.
Introduced by Lewis et al. (2021), RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) represents a significant advancement in the field of large language
models (LLMs) for enhancing generative tasks. By
dynamically retrieving information from knowledge bases during inference, RAG effectively addresses issues such as the generation of factually
incorrect content, often referred to as “hallucinations.” The integration of RAG into LLMs has been
rapidly adopted, making it a crucial technology for
enhancing chatbot capabilities and making LLMs
more practical for real-world applications.
Naive RAG is the most basic form of retrieval
augmented generation. The retrieve-read framework, which was described by Ma et al. (2023), ex2https://sigmorphon.github.io/sharedtasks/2023/
plains the process of indexing and vectorizing reference documents, retrieving relevant chunks based
on vector similarity, and generating outputs based
on compound prompts that combine the chunks
and the query. The idea of RAG has since been
expanded and adapted to several domains. Yan
et al. (2024) suggest a corrective RAG (CRAG)
approach that incorporates a lightweight retrieval
evaluator to test the quality and relevance of the retrieved content. The information is then filtered or
accepted in the process of producing the final output. In our paper, we also add a corrective step in a
different context. Instead of evaluating the retriever,
we make the LLM itself generate confidence scores
for each of its predicted outputs.
Other recent work on the IGT task takes various
approaches. Ginn et al. (2024b) build a very large,
multilingual corpus of IGT and use it to finetune
a ByT5 model (Xue et al., 2022), achieving good
results especially on languages not seen in training. He et al. (2024) train models to extract IGT
directly from audio data, and Ginn et al. (2024a)
explore the use of in-context examples to teach
LLMs to gloss low-resource language data. Using the same dataset we use, they find that LLM
performance improves dramatically with targeted
selection of examples. Even with no traditional
training or fine-tuning, models like Gemini 1.5 Pro,
Cohere’s Command R+ and GPT-4o outperform
transformer baselines. We do not explore few-shot
prompting techniques, but it is possible that the
performance of our corrective LLM can be further
enhanced in this way.
3 Methodology
Our approach combines the strengths of compact
token classification models with the knowledge
embedded in large language models (LLMs) and
structured grammatical descriptions. The process
involves several key steps:
1. Initial glossing: A compact token classification model (either RoBERTa or Bi-LSTM)
generates an initial morphological gloss for
the input sentence.
2. Retrieval: Relevant chunks of grammatical
information are retrieved based on the input
sentence and initial gloss.
3. Augmented generation: An LLM uses the retrieved grammar chunks to correct and refine
the initial gloss.

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: data and then view it as a token classification task. | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based
Row 1: data and then view it as a token classification task.: The second is to view it as a translation problem | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: on compound prompts that combine the chunks
Row 2: data and then view it as a token classification task.: with uneven input and output lengths, thus requir- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: and the query. The idea of RAG has since been
Row 3: data and then view it as a token classification task.: ing an encoder-decoder model that can perform | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: expanded and adapted to several domains. Yan
Row 4: data and then view it as a token classification task.: sequence-to-sequence conversion. In this paper, | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: et al. (2024) suggest a corrective RAG (CRAG)
Row 5: data and then view it as a token classification task.: we use the former approach. The IGT task was the | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: approach that incorporates a lightweight retrieval
Row 6: data and then view it as a token classification task.: focus of a SIGMORPHON 2023 shared task. The | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: evaluator to test the quality and relevance of the reRow 7: data and then view it as a token classification task.: task, resources, and previous models are described | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: trieved content. The information is then filtered or
Row 8: data and then view it as a token classification task.: in detail in Ginn et al. (2023). | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: accepted in the process of producing the final outRow 9: data and then view it as a token classification task.: We directly use the segmented data in track 2 of | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: put. In our paper, we also add a corrective step in a
Row 10: data and then view it as a token classification task.: the Sigmorphon 2023 glossing shared task to train | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: different context. Instead of evaluating the retriever,
Row 11: data and then view it as a token classification task.: our compact model. The corrective LLM only sees | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: we make the LLM itself generate confidence scores
Row 12: data and then view it as a token classification task.: the segmented output of the compact model and | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: for each of its predicted outputs.
Row 13: data and then view it as a token classification task.: the unsegmented text in the training data.2 | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: Other recent work on the IGT task takes various
Row 14: data and then view it as a token classification task.: | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: approaches. Ginn et al. (2024b) build a very large,
Row 15: data and then view it as a token classification task.: 2.2 Related Work | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: multilingual corpus of IGT and use it to finetune
Row 16: data and then view it as a token classification task.: Analyses like those by Conneau et al. (2020) re- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: a ByT5 model (Xue et al., 2022), achieving good
Row 17: data and then view it as a token classification task.: veal the inadequacies of large language models in | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: results especially on languages not seen in trainRow 18: data and then view it as a token classification task.: capturing the nuances of less-common languages. | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: ing. He et al. (2024) train models to extract IGT
Row 19: data and then view it as a token classification task.: These studies underline the necessity for special- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: directly from audio data, and Ginn et al. (2024a)
Row 20: data and then view it as a token classification task.: ized models that cater to the unique characteris- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: explore the use of in-context examples to teach
Row 21: data and then view it as a token classification task.: tics of low-resource languages. Furthermore, posi- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: LLMs to gloss low-resource language data. UsRow 22: data and then view it as a token classification task.: tion papers like Bender and Koller (2020) critically | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: ing the same dataset we use, they find that LLM
Row 23: data and then view it as a token classification task.: analyze the bias and limitations in LLMs, advo- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: performance improves dramatically with targeted
Row 24: data and then view it as a token classification task.: cating for more inclusive and adaptable language | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: selection of examples. Even with no traditional
Row 25: data and then view it as a token classification task.: technologies. Another interesting approach to in- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: training or fine-tuning, models like Gemini 1.5 Pro,
Row 26: data and then view it as a token classification task.: corporating linguistic information is described in | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: Cohere’s Command R+ and GPT-4o outperform
Row 27: data and then view it as a token classification task.: Tziafas et al. (2023). They directly apply syntac- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: transformer baselines. We do not explore few-shot
Row 28: data and then view it as a token classification task.: tic supervision at the pre-training stage to enhance | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: prompting techniques, but it is possible that the
Row 29: data and then view it as a token classification task.: the model with syntactic awareness. While this ap- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: performance of our corrective LLM can be further
Row 30: data and then view it as a token classification task.: proach shows promising results, pre-training again | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: enhanced in this way.
Row 31: data and then view it as a token classification task.: requires large amounts of labeled data which is not | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based:
Row 32: data and then view it as a token classification task.: available in a low resource setting. | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: 3 Methodology
Row 33: data and then view it as a token classification task.: Introduced by Lewis et al. (2021), Retrieval- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based:
Row 34: data and then view it as a token classification task.: | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: Our approach combines the strengths of compact
Row 35: data and then view it as a token classification task.: Augmented Generation (RAG) represents a signif- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based:
Row 36: data and then view it as a token classification task.: | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: token classification models with the knowledge
Row 37: data and then view it as a token classification task.: icant advancement in the field of large language | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based:
Row 38: data and then view it as a token classification task.: | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: embedded in large language models (LLMs) and
Row 39: data and then view it as a token classification task.: models (LLMs) for enhancing generative tasks. By | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based:
Row 40: data and then view it as a token classification task.: | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: structured grammatical descriptions. The process
Row 41: data and then view it as a token classification task.: dynamically retrieving information from knowl- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based:
Row 42: data and then view it as a token classification task.: | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: involves several key steps:
Row 43: data and then view it as a token classification task.: edge bases during inference, RAG effectively ad- | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based:
Row 44: data and then view it as a token classification task.: dresses issues such as the generation of factually | on vector similarity, and generating outputs based: 1. Initial glossing: A compact token classifi-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
4. Explanation generation: The LLM provides
detailed explanations and confidence scores
for each morpheme in the corrected gloss.
5. Modular optimization: In an advanced version of our approach, we fine-tune the retrieval
and token classification components together
to optimize the entire pipeline.
We explore two main variants of this approach: a
naive RAG method and a modular RAG method.
3.1 Using Naive RAG to correct the output of
a smaller model
The Naive Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
approach enhances the performance of two compact token classification models trained for glossing of Uspanteko and Arapaho. The process begins
by indexing and vectorizing reference grammar
documents using a dense vector representation like
BERT embeddings (Devlin et al., 2018). Here, we
use OpenAI embeddings (Achiam et al., 2023).
Let D = d1, d2, . . . dn be the set of n grammar
document chunks, where each di is represented as
a dense vector vi in a high-dimensional space Rd.
We experimented with different chunk sizes and
chunking strategies and found that a default chunk
size of 400 characters with a 50-character overlap
on either side provided the best results across 5
trials. We also tried chunking according to headings in the grammar, but this resulted in chunks of
uneven sizes that did not optimally aid the retrieval
process and contextual inference.
Given an input query q, in this case the sentence
to be glossed along with the attempted prediction of
the compact model, the retriever module computes
the cosine similarity between the query embedding
vq and each document chunk embedding vi:
sim(q, di) = vq · vi
∥vq∥∥vi∥
The top-k most similar document chunks Dq =
{dq1, dq2, . . . , dqk} are retrieved based on their cosine similarity scores. These chunks are concatenated with the original input query to form a compound prompt P :
P = [q; dq1; dq2; . . . ; dqk]
The prompt P is then fed into an LLM, which interprets the linguistic rules and morphological patterns described in the retrieved grammar excerpts
Dq. It uses this information to identify and correct
potential errors in the glossing output gs generated
by the smaller token classification model:
gc = LLM(P, gs)
where gc represents the corrected glossing sequence. To illustrate the correction process, let
fs be the function learned by the smaller token
classification model that maps the input sentence x
to the glossing output gs.
The Naive RAG approach learns a corrector function fRAG that takes the original input x, the glossing output gs, and the retrieved grammar chunks
Dq to produce the corrected output gc:
gc = fRAG(x, gs, Dq)
By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved
from the grammar documents, the RAG model
fRAG is able to refine the predictions of the base
model fs and generate more accurate glossing sequences. The Naive RAG approach thus enables
the smaller model to benefit from the vast knowledge captured by the LLM without the need for
extensive fine-tuning or additional training data.
This is particularly advantageous in low-resource
scenarios where labeled data is scarce, as the LLM
can provide valuable linguistic insights to guide
the glossing process. [Refer to the appendix to see
some of these generated explanations.]
3.2 Generating Labeling Justifications and
Confidence Scores
In addition to correcting glossing labels, our RAG
pipeline also generates explanations justifying the
corrections made. We achieve this by prompting
the LLM to provide a chain-of-thought reasoning
trace that justifies the decision-making process behind the corrections. The LLM is prompted with
an instruction I that requests a justification J, an
explanation of how RAG was used R, and a confidence score C for corrected glossing output gc:
[J, R, C] = LLM(I, P, gs, gc)
The justification J is a natural language explanation that describes the grammar rules and morphological patterns retrieved from the grammar excerpts Dq and how they informed the corrections
made to the glossing sequence. This explanation
can be modeled as a set of reasoning steps:
J = [r1, r2, . . . , rm]

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: by indexing | and | vectorizing | reference | grammar | Unnamed: 0 | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved
Row 1: by indexing: documents using a dense vector representation like | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: from the grammar documents, the RAG model
Row 2: by indexing: BERT embeddings (Devlin et al., 2018). Here, we | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: fRAG is able to refine the predictions of the base
Row 3: by indexing: use OpenAI embeddings (Achiam et al., 2023). | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: model fs and generate more accurate glossing seRow 4: by indexing: Let D = d1, d2, . . . dn be the set of n grammar | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: quences. The Naive RAG approach thus enables
Row 5: by indexing: document chunks, where each d | and: | vectorizing: | reference: iis represented as | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: the smaller model to benefit from the vast knowlRow 6: by indexing: a dense vector v | and: i | vectorizing: in a high-dimensional space Rd. | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: edge captured by the LLM without the need for
Row 7: by indexing: We experimented with different chunk sizes and | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: extensive fine-tuning or additional training data.
Row 8: by indexing: chunking strategies and found that a default chunk | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: This is particularly advantageous in low-resource
Row 9: by indexing: size of 400 characters with a 50-character overlap | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: scenarios where labeled data is scarce, as the LLM
Row 10: by indexing: on either side provided the best results across 5 | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: can provide valuable linguistic insights to guide
Row 11: by indexing: trials. We also tried chunking according to head- | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: the glossing process. [Refer to the appendix to see
Row 12: by indexing: ings in the grammar, but this resulted in chunks of | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: some of these generated explanations.]
Row 13: by indexing: uneven sizes that did not optimally aid the retrieval | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved:
Row 14: by indexing: | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: 3.2 Generating Labeling Justifications and
Row 15: by indexing: process and contextual inference. | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved:
Row 16: by indexing: | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: Confidence Scores
Row 17: by indexing: Given an input query q, in this case the sentence | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved:
Row 18: by indexing: to be glossed along with the attempted prediction of | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: In addition to correcting glossing labels, our RAG
Row 19: by indexing: the compact model, the retriever module computes | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: pipeline also generates explanations justifying the
Row 20: by indexing: the cosine similarity between the query embedding | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: corrections made. We achieve this by prompting
Row 21: by indexing: vq and each document chunk embedding v | and: | vectorizing: | reference: | grammar: i: | Unnamed: 0: | By leveraging the linguistic information retrieved: the LLM to provide a chain-of-thought reasoning
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
where each ri represents a single reason that links
the retrieved linguistic information to the specific
corrections made in gc. This set of ri is not necessarily sequential.
To quantify the model’s confidence in the corrected output, a confidence score C is generated.
This score reflects the LLM’s certainty in the accuracy of the final glossing sequence based on the
retrieved grammar rules and the original output gs.
When asked how it assigned confidence scores, this
was Claude’s response:
"Confidence scores were assigned based on how
closely each word or morpheme matched information provided in the grammar document. Higher
scores (closer to 1.0) indicate a strong direct match,
while lower scores (closer to 0.5) indicate a more
tentative match based on context or inference."
Through these confidence scores and justifications, the RAG pipeline boosts the interpretability
of the model’s predictions. The explanations offer insights into the linguistic reasoning behind
the corrections, allowing users to understand why
certain changes were made. This can be crucially
important for documentary linguists who may be
reluctant to use NLP tools due to concerns about
reliability and a lack of interpretibility.
3.3 Modular RAG: Training the retriever
with the sequence to sequence model
Due to the size of our grammars, it makes sense
to further train our retriever and rank the retrieved
content based on its relevance to the query. This
is an extension of the previously described Naive
RAG approach. The modular RAG approach allows for a more sample-efficient utilization of the
available grammar resources. By learning to retrieve and prioritize the most relevant excerpts, the
model can focus on the linguistic information that
is most beneficial for each specific input, rather
than processing the entire grammar at once.
1. Initial Retrieval: The process begins by retrieving k context chunks from the grammar
based on relevance to the input query.
2. Retrieval Module Training: The retrieval
module, which is a different instance of the
RoBERTa model, is fine-tuned based on the
performance of the LLM outputs. The input to
the retrieval module consists of all the initially
retrieved chunks of context, and the output is
a relevance vector r = [ r1, r2, ..., rk], where
ri ∈ [0, 1] indicates the relevance score for
the ith chunk of context.
3. Final Context Selection: Out of the k retrieved pieces of context, only the top-n most
relevant pieces are selected for use in the final
LLM prompt.
Let fs be the token classification model that
maps input sentence x to the initial glossing output
gs. The retriever module fr is trained to select the
top-n relevant grammar chunks Dq based on the
input sentence x and the initial glossing output gs:
Dq = fr(x, gs, k, n)
where k is the initial number of retrieved chunks
and n is the final number of selected chunks (n ≤
k).
The selected grammar chunks Dq are concatenated with the input sentencex and the initial glossing output gs to form a prompt P :
P = [x; gs; Dq]
The prompt P is then fed into the LLM to generate the corrected glossing sequence gc:
gc = LLM(P )
During training, the retriever fr and token classification model fs are jointly optimized using a
combined loss function:
L = Ls(gc, gt) + α · Lr(Dq, Dt)
where:
• Ls is the sequence loss between the corrected
glossing sequence gc and the ground truth
glossing labels gt.
• Lr is the retrieval loss that encourages the
retriever to select relevant grammar chunks. It
is implemented as a ranking loss between the
retrieved chunks Dq and the chunks that led
to the best LLM performance Dt.
• α is a hyperparameter that controls the weight
of the retrieval loss.
By jointly optimizing the retriever and token
classification components, the modular RAG approach enables the model to learn to identify the
most relevant grammar information and effectively

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: 2. | Retrieval Module Training: The retrieval | Unnamed: 0 | • α is a hyperparameter that controls the weight
Row 1: 2.: | Retrieval Module Training: The retrieval: module, which is a different instance of the | Unnamed: 0: | • α is a hyperparameter that controls the weight: of the retrieval loss.
Row 2: 2.: | Retrieval Module Training: The retrieval: RoBERTa model, is fine-tuned based on the | Unnamed: 0: | • α is a hyperparameter that controls the weight:
Row 3: 2.: | Retrieval Module Training: The retrieval: performance of the LLM outputs. The input to | Unnamed: 0: | • α is a hyperparameter that controls the weight: By jointly optimizing the retriever and token
Row 4: 2.: | Retrieval Module Training: The retrieval: the retrieval module consists of all the initially | Unnamed: 0: | • α is a hyperparameter that controls the weight: classification components, the modular RAG ap-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
incorporate it into the glossing process. The retriever learns to select excerpts that are most pertinent to the input sentence and initial gloss output.
During inference, the trained retriever fr is used
to select the top-n relevant grammar chunks Dq for
each input sentence x and initial glossing output gs.
These selected chunks are provided to the LLM to
generate the corrected glossing sequence gc.
3.4 Baseline Glossing Models
Our expectation is that the best results for this task
will be achieved by combining a model that exploits all available training data (the compact transformer or LSTM model) with the analytical power
of modern LLMs.
More specifically, we use two baseline glossing models, both of which have been shown to
achieve strong performance in the standard setting
for the glossing task (Ginn et al., 2023). Following
this setting, we model the production of IGT as a
token classification task rather than as a sequenceto-sequence task. Specifically, we experiment with
two baseline models: one using RoBERTa (Liu
et al., 2019), the second using a Bi-LSTM architecture. By exploiting the contextual information
captured by these architectures, we aim to obtain
accurate predictions of the morphological labels for
each token in the input sentences. These predicted
labels are then used as the initial glossing output in
the RAG framework.
For the RoBERTa baseline, we use the same
setting as the baseline for the IGT shared task, as
described in Ginn et al. (2023). The input sentences
are tokenized and encoded using the RoBERTa tokenizer and encoder. The encoded representations
are then passed through a linear classification layer
to predict the morphological labels for each token.
For the Bi-LSTM model, input sentences are first
tokenized and converted into word embeddings.
These embeddings are then fed into the Bi-LSTM
layer to obtain the contextualized token representations. A linear classification layer is applied on top
of the Bi-LSTM outputs to predict the morphological labels for each token. Both models are trained
using cross-entropy loss and optimized using the
Adam optimizer. We use an adaptive learning rate
and early stopping to ensure a better fit to the data.
We additionally compare with two different
LLMs used in a single-model, zero-shot RAG architecture. In this setting, the LLMs are solely
responsible for the glossing output, rather than correcting the output of a predecessor model.
4 Uspanteko and Arapaho: Data and
Grammars
Uspanteko is an endangered Mayan language spoken primarily in Guatemala. It is an ergativeabsolutive language with moderately complex concatenative morphology. Much morphological inflection occurs on the verb stem, which takes both
prefixes and suffixes and inflects for person, number, participant role, tense/aspect/mood, and voice,
with a final status suffix. Arapaho is an endangered
Algonquian language spoken by several communities in the Western United States. The language has
free word order, polysynthetic and agglutinating
morphology, and especially complex verbal morphology (Cowell and Moss Sr, 2011).
Data. We use the Uspanteko and Arapaho IGT
datasets provided as part of the 2023 SIGMORPHON shared task (Ginn et al., 2023), licensed
under CC BY-NC 4.0, and we use the data in accordance with the uses intended as part of the shared
task. The Uspanteko dataset has about 11,000 usable sentences and about 80 unique morphological
function labels.
The average sentence is 4.37 words, with many
multi-morphemic words. The Arapaho dataset is
much larger, consisting of 39,500 sentences (5.4
words on average per sentence) in the training set
and 5000 in the dev set.
For Uspanteko, we use a very short (10 page)
grammatical description, in Spanish, from the beginning of an Uspanteko-Spanish dictionary (Méndez, 2007). For Arapaho, we use a 500-page reference grammar authored by Andrew Cowell and
Alonzo Moss, Sr. (Cowell and Moss Sr, 2011).
5 Experiments and results
Table 1 shows results for all experimental settings,
as well as the previous state-of-the-art for each language, as reported in Ginn et al. (2023). The two
LLM-only baselines perform well below the glossing baselines (RoBERTa and Bi-LSTM, see 3.4)
and all other models. For each of the two glossing baselines, we compare our naive and modular
RAG models (see 3), separately in combination
with Claude and GPT-4. We aim to evaluate which
LLM is most effective at correcting the glossing
output of the smaller token classification network,
given retrieved grammar excerpts. Before evaluation, we perform post-processing to correct some
common punctuation errors in the LLM output.

[PAGE 7]
Uspanteko Arapaho
Model Word-level Morpheme-level Word-level Morpheme-level
Accuracy Accuracy Accuracy Accuracy
GPT-4 Baseline (Zero-shot RAG) 42.21 51.88 48.47 53.48
Claude Baseline (Zero-shot RAG) 38.40 42.21 49.91 58.60
Previous SOTA (Shared task) 78.46 84.51 85.87 91.37
RoBERTa Baseline 76.55 82.48 85.44 91.11
RoBERTa + Claude (Train + RAG) 79.21 84.84 86.82 93.74
RoBERTa + GPT-4 (Train + RAG) 78.41 81.49 85.51 91.43
RoBERTa + Claude (Modular RAG) 81.12 85.02 83.98 90.26
RoBERTa + GPT-4 (Modular RAG) 79.44 82.98 82.41 88.68
Bi-LSTM Baseline 71.28 73.90 76.41 80.44
Bi-LSTM + Claude (Train + RAG) 77.47 80.21 79.12 85.44
Bi-LSTM + GPT-4 (Train + RAG) 73.17 78.23 74.16 81.31
Bi-LSTM + Claude (Modular RAG) 78.26 82.22 81.24 85.89
Bi-LSTM + GPT-4 (Modular RAG) 74.12 78.99 76.77 82.18
Table 1: Comparison of all model performances for Uspanteko and Arapaho. Averaged over 5 runs. Highest scores
for each model type (naive, modular) are in boldface; overall high scores underlined. Naive RAG retrieves up to 6
relevant chunks of context while Modular RAG restricts this to the top 3 chunks.
We evaluate on both word-level and morphemelevel accuracy metrics as described in (Ginn et al.,
2023). These metrics are computed by comparing the corrected glossing sequences gLLM
c with
the ground truth glossing labels gt for each input
sentence x in the test set. We manage to beat the
previous SOTA with modular RAG for Uspanteko
and naive RAG for Arapaho.
We see that a RAG approach combining the
RoBERTa baseline with Claude consistently performs best. The Bi-LSTM model performs reasonably well in most cases, although it consistently
trails RoBERTa. Selective retrieval seems to help
more with Uspanteko than Arapaho. In fact, we
see a performance drop when we train the retriever
with Arapaho. Modular RAG retrieves a smaller,
more focused set of grammar chunks than naive
RAG. It is possible that this reduced set fails to
capture all the information needed to inform the
Arapaho gloss correction process, resulting in a
small accuracy drop.
6 Qualitative analysis: usability
This system is designed to support linguists and
others performing the work of interlinear glossing.
The explanations generated by the model improve
interpretability, as they provide an opportunity for
human users to get some insight into the model’s
decision-making process. The best evaluation of
the usability of our system would come from proper
user studies, which we have begun and will report
on in later work. For the present paper, we perform
two manual analyses, both performed using outputs
from our Modular RAG pipeline with RoBERTa +
Claude.
Glossing error types. Initial inspection of system outputs showed that, in some cases, the LLM
proposes a corrected gloss that is close to the expected output without being identical, resulting in
a ding to automatically-evaluated performance. For
example, the model sometimes outputs 3S when
the expected tag is 3.S. We randomly select 50 instances across the two datasets and evaluate them
for error types. Table 2 explains our error types and
their frequency across this sample; we identify 103
errors across the 50 instances. Arapaho sentences
have an average of 2.2 errors per sentence, with 1.9
for Uspanteko.
Category-type errors, where the model generates a tag instead of a lexical item, or vice versa,
are most common, followed by content-type errors,
which we consider “true” glossing errors. The error types form and specificity are those which we
expect to be easily interpreted and corrected by human users; these account for roughly 19% of the
errors. See Appendix B.1 for error subtypes.

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Uspanteko | Arapaho
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Model | Uspanteko: Word-level Morpheme-level | Arapaho: Word-level Morpheme-level
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Uspanteko: Accuracy Accuracy | Arapaho: Accuracy Accuracy
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: GPT-4 Baseline (Zero-shot RAG) | Uspanteko: 42.21 51.88 | Arapaho: 48.47 53.48
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Claude Baseline (Zero-shot RAG) | Uspanteko: 38.40 42.21 | Arapaho: 49.91 58.60
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Previous SOTA (Shared task) | Uspanteko: 78.46 84.51 | Arapaho: 85.87 91.37
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: RoBERTa Baseline | Uspanteko: 76.55 82.48 | Arapaho: 85.44 91.11
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: RoBERTa + Claude (Train + RAG) | Uspanteko: 79.21 84.84 | Arapaho: 86.82 93.74
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: RoBERTa + GPT-4 (Train + RAG) | Uspanteko: 78.41 81.49 | Arapaho: 85.51 91.43
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: RoBERTa + Claude (Modular RAG) | Uspanteko: 81.12 85.02 | Arapaho: 83.98 90.26
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: RoBERTa + GPT-4 (Modular RAG) | Uspanteko: 79.44 82.98 | Arapaho: 82.41 88.68
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: Bi-LSTM Baseline | Uspanteko: 71.28 73.90 | Arapaho: 76.41 80.44
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: Bi-LSTM + Claude (Train + RAG) | Uspanteko: 77.47 80.21 | Arapaho: 79.12 85.44
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: Bi-LSTM + GPT-4 (Train + RAG) | Uspanteko: 73.17 78.23 | Arapaho: 74.16 81.31
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: Bi-LSTM + Claude (Modular RAG) | Uspanteko: 78.26 82.22 | Arapaho: 81.24 85.89
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: Bi-LSTM + GPT-4 (Modular RAG) | Uspanteko: 74.12 78.99 | Arapaho: 76.77 82.18
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=2]
Columns: This system is designed to support linguists and | which we consider “true” glossing errors. The erRow 1: This system is designed to support linguists and: others performing the work of interlinear glossing. | which we consider “true” glossing errors. The er-: ror types form and specificity are those which we
Row 2: This system is designed to support linguists and: The explanations generated by the model improve | which we consider “true” glossing errors. The er-: expect to be easily interpreted and corrected by huRow 3: This system is designed to support linguists and: interpretability, as they provide an opportunity for | which we consider “true” glossing errors. The er-: man users; these account for roughly 19% of the
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=3]
Columns: ing the corrected glossing sequences gLLMc with | Unnamed: 0 | on in later work. For the present paper, we perform
Row 1: ing the corrected glossing sequences gLLMc with: the ground truth glossing labels gt for each input | Unnamed: 0: | on in later work. For the present paper, we perform: two manual analyses, both performed using outputs
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
Type Explanation Example Frequency
content true mismatches between expected output and model output FUT for PAST 30
form variation in form only; likely resolvable by users EXIST for EXS 18
specificity generated output is more or less specific than expected output NOM for SAB (abstract noun) 2
category generated tag where lexical output is expected, or vice versa PROHIB for ‘eat something’ 39
presence generated output contains spurious labels, PAST-NEG for PAST 10
or has fewer labels than expected
unk model generates ?, or replaces ? with a guess SREL for ? 4
Table 2: Error types and frequencies across 50 randomly-selected instances.
pre-LLM errors corr/inc/part new errors % corr. expl. exp. quality (1-5) ret. quality (1-5)
Arapaho 21 7 / 10 / 4 7 82.55% 3 1.98
Uspanteko 23 16 / 7 / 0 9 81.38% 3.19 2.42
Table 3: Manual analysis of model output, 14 Arapaho/16 Uspanteko examples. We count model corrections that are
correct, incorrect, and partially correct, as well as new errors introduced by the corrective LLM. We also rate the
average explanation correctness and quality of both explanations and retrieved chunks. Details in Appendix C.
Quality of explanations. Our second manual
analysis concerns the quality and relevance of the
explanations provided by the LLM.
Examples in App. A show the two-part structure of the explanations: 1) explanation of the presumed meaning of the morphemes, 2) explanation
of which parts of the grammar were retrieved and
used to make glossing decisions.
We randomly select 30 instances. For each,
we collect the original text, expected gloss, output of the initial glossing model, LLM-corrected
output, and the complete set of explanations and
retrieved grammar chunks from the RAG pipeline.
A professional linguist then analyzes the number
of pre-LLM errors, how many are addressed correctly/incorrectly/partially correctly, the percentage
of correct morpheme explanations, the subjective
quality of the RAG explanations, and the subjective
quality of the retrieved grammar chunks, the latter
two on a Likert scale (1-5). (Details in App. B.2.)
The results appear in Table 3. On average, the
Uspanteko corrections are more accurate, with a
similar number of new errors being introduced for
both languages. Model explanations for individual
morphemes are largely correct, and the chunks retrieved for Uspanteko are slightly higher quality.
We note that there is a clear difference in the nature of the two grammars. The Arapaho grammar
is a full and complex reference grammar, and the
Uspanteko grammar is a sketch, using simpler explanations in a more compact presentation. This
initial analysis suggests the need for a deeper exploration into linguistic reference materials of different
types and their use in RAG. Arapaho morphology
is also significantly more complex than Uspanteko
morphology, increasing the complexity of the task.
7 Conclusion
This study demonstrates the effectiveness of a
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) framework in enhancing the performance of compact
models for morphological glossing in low-resource
language contexts. By leveraging the interpretive
power of Large Language Models (LLMs) and the
structured knowledge contained in grammatical descriptions, we achieve a new state-of-the-art for
both languages investigated. A second advantage
is the interpretability provided by LLM-generated
explanations, which is crucial for building trust in
the system’s outputs and facilitating the use of NLP
tools in language documentation efforts.
The RAG approach (combining a RoBERTa
baseline with Claude) consistently outperforms
other configurations, achieving the highest wordand morpheme-level accuracies for both languages.
This framework effectively bridges the gap between
the limited training data available for low-resource
languages and the rich linguistic knowledge encoded in grammatical descriptions. The ability of
LLMs to provide detailed explanations and confidence scores for each morpheme adds a layer of
interpretability to the glossing process, potentially
increasing the utility of these tools for documentary linguists. Even with minimal grammatical
resources, as for Uspanteko, the RAG approach
shows notable improvements over baseline models.
These findings suggest that the integration of linguistic knowledge through RAG can be a powerful
approach for improving NLP tasks in low-resource
settings. By combining the strengths of compact,
trainable models with the vast knowledge encoded
in LLMs and structured grammatical descriptions,

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: Type | Explanation | Example | Frequency
Row 1: Type: content | Explanation: true mismatches between expected output and model output | Example: FUT for PAST | Frequency: 30.0
Row 2: Type: form | Explanation: variation in form only; likely resolvable by users | Example: EXIST for EXS | Frequency: 18.0
Row 3: Type: specificity | Explanation: generated output is more or less specific than expected output | Example: NOM for SAB (abstract noun) | Frequency: 2.0
Row 4: Type: category | Explanation: generated tag where lexical output is expected, or vice versa | Example: PROHIB for ‘eat something’ | Frequency: 39.0
Row 5: Type: presence | Explanation: generated output contains spurious labels, | Example: PAST-NEG for PAST | Frequency: 10.0
Row 6: Type: | Explanation: or has fewer labels than expected | Example: | Frequency:
Row 7: Type: unk | Explanation: model generates ?, or replaces ? with a guess | Example: SREL for ? | Frequency: 4.0
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=8 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | pre-LLM errors | corr/inc/part | new errors | % corr. expl. | exp. quality (1-5) | ret. quality (1-5)
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Arapaho | pre-LLM errors: 21 | corr/inc/part: 7 / 10 / 4 | new errors: 7 | % corr. expl.: 82.55% | exp. quality (1-5): 3.0 | ret. quality (1-5): 1.98
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: Uspanteko | pre-LLM errors: 23 | corr/inc/part: 16 / 7 / 0 | new errors: 9 | % corr. expl.: 81.38% | exp. quality (1-5): 3.19 | ret. quality (1-5): 2.42
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=8 index=3]
Columns: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc- | Retrieval-Augmented Generation | (RAG) | frameRow 1: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: ture of the explanations: 1) explanation of the pre- | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: work in enhancing the performance of compact | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 2: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: sumed meaning of the morphemes, 2) explanation | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: models for morphological glossing in low-resource | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 3: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: of which parts of the grammar were retrieved and | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: language contexts. By leveraging the interpretive | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 4: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: used to make glossing decisions. | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: power of Large Language Models (LLMs) and the | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 5: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: We randomly select 30 instances. For each, | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: structured knowledge contained in grammatical de- | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 6: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: we collect the original text, expected gloss, out- | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: scriptions, we achieve a new state-of-the-art | (RAG): | frame-: for
Row 7: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: put of the initial glossing model, LLM-corrected | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: both languages investigated. A second advantage | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 8: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: output, and the complete set of explanations and | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: is the interpretability provided by LLM-generated | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 9: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: retrieved grammar chunks from the RAG pipeline. | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: explanations, which is crucial for building trust in | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 10: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: A professional linguist then analyzes the number | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: the system’s outputs and facilitating the use of NLP | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 11: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: of pre-LLM errors, how many are addressed cor- | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: tools in language documentation efforts. | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 12: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: rectly/incorrectly/partially correctly, the percentage | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: The RAG approach (combining | (RAG): a RoBERTa | frame-:
Row 13: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: of correct morpheme explanations, the subjective | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: baseline with Claude) consistently | (RAG): outperforms | frame-:
Row 14: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: quality of the RAG explanations, and the subjective | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: other configurations, achieving the highest word- | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 15: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: quality of the retrieved grammar chunks, the latter | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: and morpheme-level accuracies for both languages. | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 16: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: two on a Likert scale (1-5). (Details in App. B.2.) | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: This framework effectively bridges the gap between | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 17: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: The results appear in Table 3. On average, the | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: the limited training data available for low-resource | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 18: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: Uspanteko corrections are more accurate, with a | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: languages and the rich linguistic knowledge en- | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 19: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: similar number of new errors being introduced for | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: coded in grammatical descriptions. The ability of | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 20: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: both languages. Model explanations for individual | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: LLMs to provide detailed explanations and confi- | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 21: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: morphemes are largely correct, and the chunks re- | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: dence scores for each morpheme adds a layer of | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 22: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: trieved for Uspanteko are slightly higher quality. | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: interpretability to the glossing process, potentially | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 23: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: We note that there is a clear difference in the na- | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: increasing the utility of these tools for documen- | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 24: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: ture of the two grammars. The Arapaho grammar | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: tary linguists. Even with minimal | (RAG): grammatical | frame-:
Row 25: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: is a full and complex reference grammar, and the | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: resources, as for Uspanteko, the RAG approach | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 26: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: Uspanteko grammar is a sketch, using simpler ex- | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: shows notable improvements over baseline models. | (RAG): | frame-:
Row 27: Examples in App. A show the two-part struc-: planations in a more compact presentation. This | Retrieval-Augmented Generation: These findings suggest that the integration of lin- | (RAG): | frame-:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=8 index=4]
Columns: initial analysis suggests the need for a deeper explo- | guistic knowledge through RAG can be a powerful
Row 1: initial analysis suggests the need for a deeper explo-: ration into linguistic reference materials of different | guistic knowledge through RAG can be a powerful: approach for improving NLP tasks in low-resource
Row 2: initial analysis suggests the need for a deeper explo-: types and their use in RAG. Arapaho morphology | guistic knowledge through RAG can be a powerful: settings. By combining the strengths of compact,
Row 3: initial analysis suggests the need for a deeper explo-: is also significantly more complex than Uspanteko | guistic knowledge through RAG can be a powerful: trainable models with the vast knowledge encoded
Row 4: initial analysis suggests the need for a deeper explo-: morphology, increasing the complexity of the task. | guistic knowledge through RAG can be a powerful: in LLMs and structured grammatical descriptions,
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
we can create more accurate and interpretable tools
for language documentation and analysis.
For future work, we would like to investigate
additional languages, explore more sophisticated
retrieval mechanisms, incorporate additional linguistic resources (as in Zhang et al. (2024)), and
optimize our LLM selection and fine-tuning approaches. Near term, we plan to implement the
same framework using an open-source LLM.
8 Limitations
While the proposed RAG framework for morphological glossing demonstrates promising results,
there are several limitations to consider:
1. Dependency on grammar quality: The effectiveness of the RAG pipeline heavily relies
on the quality and comprehensiveness of the
available grammar documents. If the grammar descriptions are incomplete, inconsistent,
or contain errors, the retrieved excerpts may
not provide accurate or sufficient information
to guide the glossing corrections. This can
lead to sub-optimal performance of the RAG
model.
2. Limited expressiveness of grammars: The
linguistic rules and patterns described in grammar documents may not capture all the nuances and exceptions present in the target language. Some morphological phenomena may
be too complex or irregular to be fully expressed in a concise set of rules. This limitation can hinder the RAG model’s ability
to generate accurate glossing labels for such
cases. This is especially true in the case of our
relatively small Uspanteko grammar.
3. Scalability to larger datasets: The current
experiments focus on low-resource languages
with relatively small datasets. While the RAG
approach is designed to be data-efficient, its
performance and computational requirements
when applied to larger datasets or more diverse language families remain to be investigated. The retrieval and processing of grammar excerpts may become more challenging
as the size and complexity of the data increases.
4. Generalization to unseen languages: The
RAG pipeline has been evaluated on specific
low-resource languages, such as Uspanteko
and Arapaho. However, its generalization capability to other unseen languages with different morphological typologies is not extensively tested. The effectiveness of the approach may vary depending on the similarity
of the target language to the languages used in
training and the availability of suitable grammar resources.
5. Reliance on proprietary models: We currently use two proprietary LLMs for these
experiments. Once we have the appropriate
compute infrastructure established, we plan
to implement the same architecture using an
open-source model.
6. Single evaluator for manual qualitative
analysis: So far we have performed only a
small-scale, somewhat subjective analysis of
the quality of the generated explanations and
the relevance of retrieved grammar chunks for
the sentences being glossed. We are currently
building a web interface to allow linguists and
other users to interact and evaluate model outputs. Once finished, we will expand this analysis to a more robust user study with multiple
users and multiple languages.
9 Ethical Considerations
Although generative AI is clearly helpful in making the process of language documentation more
explainable and efficient, it can also be deceptively
convincing in its justifications. Through the initial
prompt, the LLM is primed to report any uncertainties and assign confidence scores, but as seen in the
qualitative analysis, this is in no way a foolproof
approach. The RAG-driven system is not ready to
be used by language learners or for large-scale language documentation tasks without further testing.
We also recognize that we use sensitive language
data and resources to obtain our results. All our
data is part of the publicly available Sigmorphon
2023 shared task data as mentioned in section 4,
and we have permission from the producers of
the two grammars to use them for research purposes. We will continue to seek express permission
from communities and authors before using lowresource data and grammars for future experiments.
References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,

[PAGE 10]
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman,
Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.
Anthropic. 2024. Introducing claude 3.5 sonnet.
Emily M. Bender and Alexander Koller. 2020. Climbing
towards NLU: On meaning, form, and understanding
in the age of data. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5185–5198, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR,
abs/2005.14165.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal,
Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco
Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised
cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 8440–
8451, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Andrew Cowell and Alonzo Moss Sr. 2011. The Arapaho language. University Press of Colorado.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. CoRR, abs/1810.04805.
Michael Ginn, Mans Hulden, and Alexis Palmer. 2024a.
Can we teach language models to gloss endangered
languages? Preprint, arXiv:2406.18895.
Michael Ginn, Sarah Moeller, Alexis Palmer, Anna
Stacey, Garrett Nicolai, Mans Hulden, and Miikka
Silfverberg. 2023. Findings of the SIGMORPHON
2023 shared task on interlinear glossing. In Proceedings of the 20th SIGMORPHON workshop on
Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology,
and Morphology, pages 186–201, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Michael Ginn, Lindia Tjuatja, Taiqi He, Enora
Rice, Graham Neubig, Alexis Palmer, and Lori
Levin. 2024b. GlossLM: Multilingual pretraining for low-resource interlinear glossing. Preprint,
arXiv:2403.06399.
Taiqi He, Kwanghee Choi, Lindia Tjuatja, Nathaniel
Robinson, Jiatong Shi, Shinji Watanabe, Graham
Neubig, David Mortensen, and Lori Levin. 2024.
Wav2Gloss: Generating interlinear glossed text from
speech. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Oskar Holmström, Jenny Kunz, and Marco Kuhlmann.
2023. Bridging the resource gap: Exploring the efficacy of English and multilingual LLMs for Swedish.
In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Resources and Representations for Under-Resourced
Languages and Domains (RESOURCEFUL-2023),
pages 92–110, Tórshavn, the Faroe Islands. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2021.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledgeintensive nlp tasks. Preprint, arXiv:2005.11401.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. Preprint, arXiv:1907.11692.
Xinbei Ma, Yeyun Gong, Pengcheng He, Hai Zhao,
and Nan Duan. 2023. Query rewriting for retrievalaugmented large language models. Preprint,
arXiv:2305.14283.
Miguel Angel Vicente Méndez. 2007. Cholaj Tzijb’al li Uspanteko: Diccionario Bilingüe UspantekoEspañol. OKMA.
Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin,
Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-baptiste
Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. 2024. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of
tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten,
Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu,
Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan,
Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas

[PAGE 11]
Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and finetuned chat models. Preprint, arXiv:2307.09288.
Georgios Tziafas, Konstantinos Kogkalidis, Gijs Wijnholds, and Michael Moortgat. 2023. Improving
BERT pretraining with syntactic supervision. In Proceedings of the 2023 CLASP Conference on Learning
with Small Data (LSD), pages 176–184, Gothenburg,
Sweden. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and
Denny Zhou. 2023. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Preprint,
arXiv:2201.11903.
Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami AlRfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam Roberts,
and Colin Raffel. 2022. Byt5: Towards a token-free
future with pre-trained byte-to-byte models. Preprint,
arXiv:2105.13626.
Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling.
2024. Corrective retrieval augmented generation.
Preprint, arXiv:2401.15884.
Kexun Zhang, Yee Man Choi, Zhenqiao Song, Taiqi
He, William Yang Wang, and Lei Li. 2024. Hire
a linguist!: Learning endangered languages with
in-context linguistic descriptions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.18025.
A Sample explanations
A.1 Uspanteko Example
Given the Uspanteko sentence "t wi’ tene’ qleen
tob’ool laq b’ee", Claude produced the following
corrected gloss: "EXST talvez NEG-existir ayudarNMLZ PREP camino". In addition to the corrected
gloss, Claude generated a detailed explanation for
each morpheme, along with confidence scores:
•’wi" is an existential predicate (EXIST) indicating the presence or existence of something.
(confidence: 0.9)
•’tene" is a particle meaning ’maybe’ or ’perhaps’. (confidence: 0.7)
•’qleen’ is a negative existential predicate
(NEG-exist), indicating the non-existence of
something. (confidence: 0.9)
•’tob’ool’ can be broken down as: ’tob" (verb
root meaning ’to help’), ’-ool’ (suffix nominalizing the verb, NMLZ), yielding a noun
meaning ’help’ or ’assistance’. (confidence:
0.8)
•’laq’ is a preposition meaning ’at’ or ’in’.
(confidence: 0.8)
•’b’ee’ is a noun meaning ’path’, ’road’, or
’way’. (confidence: 0.9)
Claude also provided information on how the
RAG approach was used to arrive at the corrections:
• The existential predicate ’wi" and the negative
existential predicate ’qleen’, both of which
appeared in the example sentences.
• The information about the suffix ’-ool’ nominalizing verbs (NMLZ), which was mentioned
in the ’Estructura de las entradas’ (Structure
of the entries) section.
• The noun ’b’ee’ meaning ’path’, which appeared in one of the example sentences.
• The meanings of ’tene" and ’laq’ were inferred
from context, as they are not explicitly defined
in the grammar document.
A.2 Arapaho Example
Given the Arapaho sentence "Hookoh
neniih’ei3i’okuno’ hoo3oo’o’ hiniito’eino
notoone hiihoowuno’useenino ", Claude produced the following corrected gloss: "because
IC.scattered-sit-1PL what 3S-relative-OBV .PL
1S-people NEG-arrive-3PL". In addition to the
corrected gloss, Claude generated a detailed
explanation for each morpheme, along with
confidence scores:
• hookoh: glossed as because, seems to be a
conjunction (confidence: 0.9)
• neniih’ei3i’okuno’: a complex verb form
(confidence: 0.8)
– neniih’ei-: possibly an initial change
(IC) form of scattered
– -3i’oku-: likely means sit
– -no’: 1PL (first person plural) marker
• hoo3oo’o: glossed as what, likely an interrogative pronoun (confidence: 0.9)
• hiniito’eino: appears to be a noun phrase
(confidence: 0.7)
– hini-: possibly 3S (third person singular)
prefix
– -ito’ei-: root meaning relative
– -no: OBV .PL (obviative plural) marker

[PAGE 12]
• notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a possessed noun (confidence: 0.8)
– no-: 1S (first person singular) possessive
prefix
– -toone: root meaning people
• hiihoowuno’useenino: a complex verb form
(confidence: 0.8)
– hiihoowu-: NEG (negation) prefix
– -no’usee-: verb root meaning arrive
– -nino: 3PL (third person plural) marker
Claude also provided information on how the
RAG approach was used to arrive at the corrections:
• The basic morphosyntax structure provided
insight into the order of elements in the verb
complex.
• The document mentions person markers and
their positions, which helped in identifying
-no’as 1PL and -nino as 3PL.
• The negation prefix ihoowu- is mentioned,
which appears here as hiihoowu-.
• The document discusses obviative plural markers, supporting the interpretation of -no in
hiniito’eino.
• The contraction rules mentioned weren’t directly applicable here but provided context for
understanding morpheme boundaries.
B Details of qualitative analyses
B.1 Glossing error types
In section 6 we present an analysis of the types
of glossing errors made by our best model, across
50 randomly-selected sentences. The figures presented there are for high-level error categories. During the analysis, we consider a number of subtypes
for each high-level error type.
Table 6 (next page) shows the complete set of error types and subtypes, with frequencies, examples,
and descriptions.
B.2 Quality of explanations
Our process for analyzing the quality of explanations provided consisted of five steps.
1. Compare glossing output of the baseline token
classification model to the expected (gold standard) glossing output, counting the number of
errors at the morpheme level.
usefulness/correctness
1 all explanations incorrect and/or unuseful
2 most explanations incorrect and/or unuseful
3 about half of explanations correct and/or useful
4 most explanations correct and/or useful
5 all explanations correct and/or useful
Table 4: Likert scale used to score morpheme explanations provided by the corrective LLM.
quality/relevance
1 all explanations unhelpful or misleading
2 most explanations unhelpful or irrelevant
3 about half of explanations relevant and helpful
4 most explanations relevant and helpful
5 all explanations relevant and helpful
Table 5: Likert scale used to score RAG explanations
provided by the corrective LLM.
2. Compare the LLM-corrected to the baseline
output. For each error in the baseline output,
determine whether the LLM made a correct
correction, an incorrect correction, or a partially correct correction. In addition, look for
new errors introduced by the corrective LLM.
3. For the set of morpheme explanations, mark
each as correct, partially correct, or incorrect.
Determine the percentage of correct explanations by comparing to the expected gloss,
with partially correct explanations receiving
0.5 points.
4. Rate the set of explanations about how RAG
was used according to their usefulness and/or
correctness, using the scale in Table 4.
5. For each retrieved grammar chunk, rate
its quality/relevance for the example being
glossed, using the scale in Table 5. Compute
the average score across all retrieved grammar
chunks.

[TABLE page=12 index=1]
Columns: – -no’usee-: verb root meaning arrive | Unnamed: 0 | quality/relevance
Row 1: – -no’usee-: verb root meaning arrive: – -nino: 3PL (third person plural) marker | Unnamed: 0: 1 | quality/relevance: all explanations unhelpful or misleading
Row 2: – -no’usee-: verb root meaning arrive: | Unnamed: 0: 2 | quality/relevance: most explanations unhelpful or irrelevant
Row 3: – -no’usee-: verb root meaning arrive: Claude also provided information on how the | Unnamed: 0: 3 | quality/relevance: about half of explanations relevant and helpful
Row 4: – -no’usee-: verb root meaning arrive: RAG approach was used to arrive at the corrections: | Unnamed: 0: 4 | quality/relevance: most explanations relevant and helpful
Row 5: – -no’usee-: verb root meaning arrive: • The basic morphosyntax structure provided | Unnamed: 0: 5 | quality/relevance: all explanations relevant and helpful
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=12 index=2]
Columns: • | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos- | Unnamed: 0 | usefulness/correctness
Row 1: •: | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: sessed noun (confidence: 0.8) | Unnamed: 0: 1.0 | usefulness/correctness: all explanations incorrect and/or unuseful
Row 2: •: | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: | Unnamed: 0: 2.0 | usefulness/correctness: most explanations incorrect and/or unuseful
Row 3: •: | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: – no-: 1S (first person singular) possessive | Unnamed: 0: | usefulness/correctness:
Row 4: •: | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: | Unnamed: 0: 3.0 | usefulness/correctness: about half of explanations correct and/or useful
Row 5: •: | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: prefix | Unnamed: 0: | usefulness/correctness:
Row 6: •: | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: | Unnamed: 0: 4.0 | usefulness/correctness: most explanations correct and/or useful
Row 7: •: | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: – -toone: root meaning people | Unnamed: 0: | usefulness/correctness:
Row 8: •: | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: | Unnamed: 0: 5.0 | usefulness/correctness: all explanations correct and/or useful
Row 9: •: • | notoone: glossed as 1S-people, likely a pos-: hiihoowuno’useenino: a complex verb form | Unnamed: 0: | usefulness/correctness:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=12 index=3]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | • The negation | prefix | ihoowu- | is | mentioned, | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | determine whether the LLM made a correct
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: which appears here as hiihoowu-. | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: correction, an incorrect correction, or a parRow 2: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: tially correct correction. In addition, look for
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: • The document discusses obviative plural mark- | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: new errors introduced by the corrective LLM.
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: ers, supporting the interpretation of | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: -no in | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: hiniito’eino. | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 3.0 | determine whether the LLM made a correct: For the set of morpheme explanations, mark
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: each as correct, partially correct, or incorrect.
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: • The contraction rules mentioned weren’t di- | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: Determine the percentage of correct explaRow 8: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: rectly applicable here but provided context for | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: nations by comparing to the expected gloss,
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: understanding morpheme boundaries. | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: with partially correct explanations receiving
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: B | • The negation: Details of qualitative analyses | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: 0.5 points.
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: B.1 | • The negation: Glossing error types | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 4.0 | determine whether the LLM made a correct: Rate the set of explanations about how RAG
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: was used according to their usefulness and/or
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: In section 6 we present an analysis of the types | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: correctness, using the scale in Table 4.
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: of glossing errors made by our best model, across | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct:
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: 50 randomly-selected sentences. The figures pre- | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 5.0 | determine whether the LLM made a correct: For each retrieved grammar chunk, rate
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: sented there are for high-level error categories. Dur- | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: its quality/relevance for the example being
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: ing the analysis, we consider a number of subtypes | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: glossed, using the scale in Table 5. Compute
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: for each high-level error type. | • The negation: | prefix: | ihoowu-: | is: | mentioned,: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | determine whether the LLM made a correct: the average score across all retrieved grammar
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 13]
type subtype example notes frequency
content wholeDiff FUT for NEG single tag wrong, output is 13
entirely different linguistic dimension
wholeSame FUT for PAST single tag wrong, output is 8
same linguistic dimension
partial E3S for E3P one part of compound tag is incorrect 8
multiple 0S for 3PL all parts of compound tag are incorrect 1
form variant EXIST for EXS output has generated a plausible variant 5
not in the tagset (could be in the grammar)
similar IMP for IMPER output is incorrect tag, similar to correct 2
tag, both are in the tagset
punct 3.S for 3S, 3-S for 3S only difference is punctuation (could be 9
missing, could be spurious, could be replacement)
case PAUSE for pause difference is case (which is 2
potentially meaningful in this setting)
presence extra PAST-NEG for PAST output contains spuriously generated material 8
missing output is missing a tag 2
specificity hyper NOM for SAB generated output is less specific than expected 1
tag (e.g. nominal for abstract noun)
hypo DET for PART generated output is more specific than expected 1
tag (e.g. DET could be one of many types of particles)
category 2lex so.that for DETACH generated output has lexical translation instead of tag 17
2tag PROHIB for eat.s.t. generated output has tag instead of lexical translation 22
unk unk ? for SC model generates ? 2
guess SC for ? model guesses where original gloss has question marks 2
Table 6: Glossing error analysis types and subtypes, together with frequencies across 50 sentences.

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: type | subtype | example | notes | frequency
Row 1: type: content | subtype: wholeDiff | example: FUT for NEG | notes: single tag wrong, output is | frequency: 13.0
Row 2: type: | subtype: | example: | notes: entirely different linguistic dimension | frequency:
Row 3: type: | subtype: wholeSame | example: FUT for PAST | notes: single tag wrong, output is | frequency: 8.0
Row 4: type: | subtype: | example: | notes: same linguistic dimension | frequency:
Row 5: type: | subtype: partial | example: E3S for E3P | notes: one part of compound tag is incorrect | frequency: 8.0
Row 6: type: | subtype: multiple | example: 0S for 3PL | notes: all parts of compound tag are incorrect | frequency: 1.0
Row 7: type: form | subtype: variant | example: EXIST for EXS | notes: output has generated a plausible variant | frequency: 5.0
Row 8: type: | subtype: | example: | notes: not in the tagset (could be in the grammar) | frequency:
Row 9: type: | subtype: similar | example: IMP for IMPER | notes: output is incorrect tag, similar to correct | frequency: 2.0
Row 10: type: | subtype: | example: | notes: tag, both are in the tagset | frequency:
Row 11: type: | subtype: punct | example: 3.S for 3S, 3-S for 3S | notes: only difference is punctuation (could be | frequency: 9.0
Row 12: type: | subtype: | example: | notes: missing, could be spurious, could be replacement) | frequency:
Row 13: type: | subtype: case | example: PAUSE for pause | notes: difference is case (which is | frequency: 2.0
Row 14: type: | subtype: | example: | notes: potentially meaningful in this setting) | frequency:
Row 15: type: presence | subtype: extra | example: PAST-NEG for PAST | notes: output contains spuriously generated material | frequency: 8.0
Row 16: type: | subtype: missing | example: | notes: output is missing a tag | frequency: 2.0
Row 17: type: specificity | subtype: hyper | example: NOM for SAB | notes: generated output is less specific than expected | frequency: 1.0
Row 18: type: | subtype: | example: | notes: tag (e.g. nominal for abstract noun) | frequency:
Row 19: type: | subtype: hypo | example: DET for PART | notes: generated output is more specific than expected | frequency: 1.0
Row 20: type: | subtype: | example: | notes: tag (e.g. DET could be one of many types of particles) | frequency:
Row 21: type: category | subtype: 2lex | example: so.that for DETACH | notes: generated output has lexical translation instead of tag | frequency: 17.0
Row 22: type: | subtype: 2tag | example: PROHIB for eat.s.t. | notes: generated output has tag instead of lexical translation | frequency: 22.0
Row 23: type: unk | subtype: unk | example: ? for SC | notes: model generates ? | frequency: 2.0
Row 24: type: | subtype: guess | example: SC for ? | notes: model guesses where original gloss has question marks | frequency: 2.0
[/TABLE]