[PAGE 1]
AirRAG: Autonomous Strategic Planning and Reasoning Steer Retrieval
Augmented Generation
Wenfeng Feng*, Chuzhan Hao*, Yuewei Zhang, Guochao Jiang, Jingyi Song & Hao Wang†
Alibaba Cloud Computing
{wenfeng.fwf,haochuzhan.hcz}@alibaba-inc.com,cashenry@126.com
Abstract
Leveraging the autonomous decision-making
capabilities of large language models (LLMs)
has demonstrated superior performance in reasoning tasks. However, despite the success of
iterative or agentic retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) techniques, these methods are often
constrained to a single solution space when confronted with complex problems. In this paper,
we propose a novel thinking pattern in RAG
that integrates autonomous strategic planning
with efficient reasoning actions, significantly
activating intrinsic reasoning capabilities and
expanding the solution space of specific tasks
via Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), which
we refer to as AirRAG. Specifically, our approach designs five fundamental reasoning actions, which are expanded to a broad tree-based
reasoning space using MCTS. The approach
also incorporates self-consistency verification
to explore potential reasoning paths and inference scaling law. Additionally, computationally optimal strategies are employed to allocate more inference resources to key actions,
thereby enhancing overall performance. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of AirRAG, showing significant performance gains on complex question-answering
datasets. Furthermore, AirRAG is flexible and
lightweight, making it easy to integrate with
other advanced technologies and models.
1 Introduction
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has
shown great potential in addressing the issue
of generating factually incorrect content, especially in domain-specific or knowledge-intensive
tasks (Kandpal et al., 2023). However, as task complexity increases, several new challenges emerge,
such as the inability to retrieve sufficient knowledge with a single query and the difficulty of un-
*The first two authors contributed equally
†Corresponding author
1 2 3 4 5
Number of Output Sequences
78Score
Accuracy
Recall
F1
Ltotal
1k2k
4k
8k
16k
32k
Total Tokens
Figure 1: Comparison of average performance across
three datasets with varying numbers of output sequences.
Ltotal represents the total number of tokens consumed
during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages generation diversity and self-consistency to explore the potential solution space, significantly enhancing overall
performance by scaling inference computation.
derstanding the intricate reasoning logic inherent
in the question. To tackle these challenges, it is crucial to harness the reasoning capabilities of large
language models (LLMs) to improve RAG performance (Jiang et al., 2023; Jeong et al., 2024; Asai
et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024).
Previous research on complex query scenarios
has primarily focused on optimizing the query
and retrieval processes to obtain relevant information (Shi et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Gao et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024; Asai
et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024). Iterative retrieval is
frequently used to improve the depth and relevance
of search results in information retrieval tasks. This
process continuously updates intermediate queries
and results to satisfy dynamic information needs
during the complex task-solving process (Jeong
et al., 2024; Yue et al., 2024). In addition, Li et al.
(2025) integrates an agentic search workflow into
the reasoning process, enabling dynamic retrieval
when LLMs encounter uncertain knowledge points.
arXiv:2501.10053v3 [cs.AI] 27 Aug 2025

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac- | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages genRow 1: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: tions, which are expanded to a broad tree-based | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: eration diversity and self-consistency to explore the poRow 2: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: reasoning space using MCTS. The approach | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: tential solution space, significantly enhancing overall
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: also incorporates self-consistency verification | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: performance by scaling inference computation.
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: to explore potential reasoning paths and infer- | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: ence scaling law. Additionally, computation- | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: ally optimal strategies are employed to allo- | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: derstanding the intricate reasoning logic inherent
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: cate more inference resources to key actions, | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: in the question. To tackle these challenges, it is cruRow 8: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: thereby enhancing overall performance. Ex- | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: cial to harness the reasoning capabilities of large
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: perimental results demonstrate the effective- | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: language models (LLMs) to improve RAG perforRow 10: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: ness of AirRAG, showing significant perfor- | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: mance (Jiang et al., 2023; Jeong et al., 2024; Asai
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: mance gains on complex question-answering | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024).
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: datasets. Furthermore, AirRAG is flexible and | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: lightweight, making it easy to integrate with | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: Previous research on complex query scenarios
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: other advanced technologies and models. | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: has primarily focused on optimizing the query
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: and retrieval processes to obtain relevant informaRow 18: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: tion (Shi et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Gao et al.,
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: 1 | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: Introduction | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024; Asai
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: Retrieval-Augmented | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: Generation (RAG) has | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024). Iterative retrieval is
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: shown | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: great potential in addressing the issue | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: frequently used to improve the depth and relevance
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: of | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: generating factually incorrect content, espe- | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: of search results in information retrieval tasks. This
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: cially in domain-specific or knowledge-intensive | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: process continuously updates intermediate queries
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: tasks (Kandpal et al., 2023). However, as task com- | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: and results to satisfy dynamic information needs
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: plexity increases, several new challenges emerge, | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: during the complex task-solving process (Jeong
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: such as the inability to retrieve sufficient knowl- | proach designs five fundamental reasoning ac-: | during the reasoning process. AirRAG leverages gen-: et al., 2024; Yue et al., 2024). In addition, Li et al.
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=1 index=2]
Columns: tion (RAG) techniques, these methods are often | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Score
Row 1: tion (RAG) techniques, these methods are often: | Unnamed: 0: 64.0 | Unnamed: 1: | Score:
Row 2: tion (RAG) techniques, these methods are often: constrained to a single solution space when con- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Score:
Row 3: tion (RAG) techniques, these methods are often: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: 8k | Score:
Row 4: tion (RAG) techniques, these methods are often: fronted with complex problems. In this paper, | Unnamed: 0: 62.0 | Unnamed: 1: | Score:
Row 5: tion (RAG) techniques, these methods are often: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: 4k | Score:
Row 6: tion (RAG) techniques, these methods are often: we propose a novel thinking pattern in RAG | Unnamed: 0: 60.0 | Unnamed: 1: | Score:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
The agentic LLMs are trained to learn step-by-step
reasoning with search through reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025).
However, these approaches face two significant
issues. First, the single reasoning paradigm and
the chain-like reasoning process often fail to effectively explore the solution space, particularly
when reasoning relies on self-exploration. This
process is vulnerable to low-quality intermediate
reasoning steps and is easily trapped in a narrow
solution space. Second, the agentic search workflow and guiding self-exploration become challenging when using relatively smaller language models (e.g., Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024)).
Furthermore, trainable agentic LLMs require efficient reinforcement learning training data and are
difficult to apply to models with hundreds of billions of parameters.
In response to these challenges, we propose
AirRAG, a method that leverages autonomous
strategic planning and reasoning capabilities and
expands the solution space using Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS). We design five fundamental reasoning actions: system analysis, direct answer, retrieval-answer, query transformation, and
summary-answer. These actions are the core and
frequently used ones in the deep search scenarios, which can effectively address a wide range
of problems in various scenarios, including those
that require progressive or parallel queries. Importantly, these actions can be executed efficiently on
LLMs of different scales. Additionally, we introduce MCTS and self-consistency to enable controllable reasoning path generation and efficient
inference scaling. To accurately select the answer
from multiple reasoning paths, we combine a voting mechanism with a process-supervised reward
model. As inference computation increases, our
approach demonstrates significant performance improvements as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, AirRAG features a flexible architecture that can easily
integrate other advanced methods into the approach
as additional action branches. In summary, our
main contributions are as follows:
• We design five fundamental reasoning actions
that can address most problem types in deep
search scenarios, ensuring controllable reasoning processes.
• We introduce MCTS and self-consistency to
effectively expand the solution space for complex tasks. Our approach improves generalization and performance through comprehensive
inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.
• We show thorough experimental results that
AirRAG outperforms current iterative or agentic methods, effectively activating the planning and reasoning capabilities of LLMs and
flexibly expanding the solution space.
2 Related Work
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). RAG
has demonstrated significant improvements in the
performance of LLMs in knowledge-intensive
tasks. Compared to vanilla RAG, optimizing the
query and retrieval process enhances knowledge
correlation and, consequently, improves reasoning
performance. Several methods, such as query expansion and transformation, have been proposed
to achieve better retrieval results (Zhou et al.,
2023; Ma et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023). However, as task complexity increases, retrieving sufficient knowledge in a single query becomes increasingly difficult. To address this, iterative retrieval techniques have been proposed to gather
additional contextual references. For instance, IRCoT (Trivedi et al., 2023) utilizes chain-of-thought
(CoT) to guide the retrieval process, refining the
CoT with the retrieved information. Similarly,
ITER-RETGEN (Shao et al., 2023) combines retrieval and generation modules to promote a deeper
understanding of specific tasks.
Autonomous Planning and Reasoning in RAG.
In addition to optimizing retrieval, activating the
planning and reasoning capabilities of LLMs can
significantly improve the efficiency and relevance
of the retrieved information. Leveraging the
decision-making abilities of LLMs enhances the
overall performance (Nakano et al., 2022; Schick
et al., 2023). Self-RAG and its variants (Asai et al.,
2024; Yan et al., 2024; Jeong et al., 2024) adopt
a self-reflection mechanism that iteratively predicts reflection tokens during training, enabling
better control during inference. Auto-RAG (Yu
et al., 2024) systematically plans retrievals and
refines queries to acquire valuable knowledge
through multi-turn iterations. IterDRAG (Yue
et al., 2024) explores inference scaling strategies
in RAG, improving LLMs’ ability to effectively
acquire and utilize contextual information. Searcho1 (Li et al., 2025) designs an agentic search
workflow to dynamically obtain effective knowledge. ReSearch (Chen et al., 2025) and DeepRe-

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn- | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.
Row 1: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: ing (Chen et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025). | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 2: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: However, these approaches face two significant | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: • | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: We show thorough experimental results that
Row 3: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: issues. First, the single reasoning paradigm and | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: AirRAG outperforms current iterative or agenRow 4: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: the chain-like reasoning process often fail to ef- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: tic methods, effectively activating the planRow 5: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: fectively explore the solution space, particularly | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: ning and reasoning capabilities of LLMs and
Row 6: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: when reasoning relies on self-exploration. This | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: flexibly expanding the solution space.
Row 7: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: process is vulnerable to low-quality intermediate | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 8: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: | Unnamed: 0: 2 | Unnamed: 1: Related Work | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 9: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: reasoning steps and is easily trapped in a narrow | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 10: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: solution space. Second, the agentic search work- | Unnamed: 0: Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). RAG | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 11: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: flow and guiding self-exploration become challeng- | Unnamed: 0: has demonstrated significant improvements in the | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 12: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: ing when using relatively smaller language mod- | Unnamed: 0: performance | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: of LLMs in knowledge-intensive
Row 13: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: els (e.g., Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024)). | Unnamed: 0: tasks. | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: Compared to vanilla RAG, optimizing the
Row 14: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: Furthermore, trainable agentic LLMs require effi- | Unnamed: 0: query and retrieval process enhances knowledge | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 15: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: cient reinforcement learning training data and are | Unnamed: 0: correlation and, consequently, improves reasoning | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 16: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: difficult to apply to models with hundreds of bil- | Unnamed: 0: performance. Several methods, such as query ex- | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 17: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: lions of parameters. | Unnamed: 0: pansion and transformation, have been proposed | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 18: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: In response to these challenges, we propose | Unnamed: 0: to | Unnamed: 1: achieve | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: better retrieval results (Zhou et al.,
Row 19: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: AirRAG, a method that leverages autonomous | Unnamed: 0: 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023). | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: HowRow 20: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: strategic planning and reasoning capabilities and | Unnamed: 0: ever, as task complexity increases, retrieving suf- | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 21: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: expands the solution space using Monte Carlo | Unnamed: 0: ficient knowledge in a single query becomes in- | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 22: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: Tree Search (MCTS). We design five fundamen- | Unnamed: 0: creasingly difficult. | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: To address this, iterative reRow 23: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: tal reasoning actions: system analysis, direct an- | Unnamed: 0: trieval | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: techniques have been proposed to gather
Row 24: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: swer, retrieval-answer, query transformation, and | Unnamed: 0: additional contextual references. For instance, IR- | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 25: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: summary-answer. These actions are the core and | Unnamed: 0: CoT (Trivedi et al., 2023) utilizes chain-of-thought | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 26: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: frequently used ones in the deep search scenar- | Unnamed: 0: (CoT) to guide the retrieval process, refining the | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 27: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: ios, which can effectively address a wide range | Unnamed: 0: CoT | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: with the retrieved information. Similarly,
Row 28: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: of problems in various scenarios, including those | Unnamed: 0: ITER-RETGEN (Shao et al., 2023) combines re- | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 29: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: that require progressive or parallel queries. Impor- | Unnamed: 0: trieval and generation modules to promote a deeper | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 30: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: tantly, these actions can be executed efficiently on | Unnamed: 0: understanding of specific tasks. | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 31: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: LLMs of different scales. Additionally, we intro- | Unnamed: 0: Autonomous Planning and Reasoning in RAG. | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 32: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: duce MCTS and self-consistency to enable con- | Unnamed: 0: In addition to optimizing retrieval, activating the | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 33: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: trollable reasoning path generation and efficient | Unnamed: 0: planning and reasoning capabilities of LLMs can | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 34: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: inference scaling. To accurately select the answer | Unnamed: 0: significantly improve the efficiency and relevance | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 35: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: from multiple reasoning paths, we combine a vot- | Unnamed: 0: of | Unnamed: 1: the | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: retrieved information. Leveraging the
Row 36: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: ing mechanism with a process-supervised reward | Unnamed: 0: decision-making abilities of LLMs enhances the | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 37: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: model. As inference computation increases, our | Unnamed: 0: overall performance (Nakano et al., 2022; Schick | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 38: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: approach demonstrates significant performance im- | Unnamed: 0: et al., 2023). Self-RAG and its variants (Asai et al., | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 39: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: provements as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, Air- | Unnamed: 0: 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Jeong et al., 2024) adopt | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 40: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: RAG features a flexible architecture that can easily | Unnamed: 0: a | Unnamed: 1: self-reflection | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: mechanism that iteratively preRow 41: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: integrate other advanced methods into the approach | Unnamed: 0: dicts | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: reflection tokens during training, enabling
Row 42: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: as additional action branches. In summary, our | Unnamed: 0: better control during inference. | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: Auto-RAG (Yu
Row 43: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: main contributions are as follows: | Unnamed: 0: et | Unnamed: 1: al., | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: 2024) systematically plans retrievals and
Row 44: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: | Unnamed: 0: refines | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: queries to acquire valuable knowledge
Row 45: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: • We design five fundamental reasoning actions | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 46: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: | Unnamed: 0: through | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: multi-turn iterations. IterDRAG (Yue
Row 47: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: that can address most problem types in deep | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 48: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: | Unnamed: 0: et al., 2024) explores inference scaling strategies | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 49: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: search scenarios, ensuring controllable reason- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 50: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: | Unnamed: 0: in RAG, improving LLMs’ ability to effectively | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 51: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: ing processes. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 52: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: | Unnamed: 0: acquire and utilize contextual information. Search- | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 53: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: • We introduce MCTS and self-consistency to | Unnamed: 0: o1 | Unnamed: 1: (Li | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: et al., 2025) designs an agentic search
Row 54: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: effectively expand the solution space for com- | Unnamed: 0: workflow to dynamically obtain effective knowl- | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.:
Row 55: reasoning with search through reinforcement learn-: plex tasks. Our approach improves generaliza- | Unnamed: 0: edge. | Unnamed: 1: | inference scaling and a pluggable architecture.: ReSearch (Chen et al., 2025) and DeepRe-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
searcher (Zheng et al., 2025) train agentic LLMs
to reason with search using reinforcement learning. Despite the progress made in these methods,
they often struggle to explore the solution space
effectively during reasoning. Self-exploration frequently leads to being trapped in a limited solution space, hindered by low-quality reasoning steps
even after multiple iterations. This issue is often
attributed to the chain reasoning pattern and the
difficulty small-scale LLMs face when handling
overly complex tasks in a single iteration.
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). To address
these challenges, tree-based search algorithms, particularly Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), have
emerged as effective tools to expand search spaces
and enhance reasoning capabilities (Silver et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2024). MCTS has been shown to extend
reasoning by exploring multiple branching queries,
thus enabling the exploration of diverse reasoning
paths (Yao et al., 2023; Besta et al., 2024). In
the mathematical reasoning scenario, Zhang et al.
(2024) and Chen et al. (2024) leverage MCTS
to achieve more efficient exploration of solution
spaces, while Qi et al. (2024) designs rich humanlike reasoning actions to improve reasoning trajectories. Furthermore, recent research indicates
that inference scaling (Yue et al., 2024) and selfconsistency (Wang et al., 2023) can lead to substantial improvements. In this context, our approach
samples diverse reasoning paths to achieve both
inference scaling and self-consistency verification
during the next expansion of the action space.
Unlike existing methods that focus on optimizing query and retrieval processes or leveraging
LLMs’ reasoning capabilities through iterative retrieval, AirRAG uniquely integrates MCTS and
self-consistency to systematically expand the solution space and ensure the controllability of the
reasoning process. Simultaneously, we design five
fundamental reasoning actions that effectively address a broader range of question types, particularly
in complex tasks. This pluggable architecture also
allows for easy integration of current advanced
methods or reasoning language models, making
AirRAG a flexible and powerful solution for deep
search scenarios. In the experiment, we thoroughly
verify the performance gains brought by the inference scaling law and investigate how to rationally
allocate inference resources.
3 Methodology
In order to effectively explore the solution space
during reasoning, we propose a controllable treebased framework of RAG. This framework combines Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with five
distinct reasoning actions, enabling efficient and
controlled expansion of the solution space. Meanwhile, we further implement more comprehensive
inference scaling strategies based on Yue et al.
(2024) and employ pruning techniques along with
computationally optimal strategies to strike a balance between effectiveness and efficiency. The
whole process is illustrated in Figure 2.
3.1 Define Fundamental Reasoning Actions
Relying solely on the autonomy of LLMs for iterative self-exploration often results in getting trapped
in a solution space that is difficult to navigate, especially when dealing with different types of complex questions. IterDRAG (Yue et al., 2024) uses
a single action type to generate the next reasoning
step, which can lead to ineffective space exploration. The core of MCTS generation lies in the
action space, which defines the scope of tree exploration. Based on advanced methods and reasoning
language models, we summarize the most common actions in RAG, such as query transformation
and retrieval answering. Meanwhile, the chain-ofthought in reasoning models has demonstrated superior performance in complex open-domain question answering. Therefore, simplifying human
cognitive processes in complex reasoning is essential (Jaffe et al., 2023). Inspired by this, we
introduce five fundamental human-like reasoning
actions to bridge the gap between LLM reasoning
and human cognition in RAG scenarios.
• A1: System Analysis (SAY). This action analyzes
the overall structure of the problem, followed
by its decomposition or planning. It represents
systematic and global thinking before problemsolving.
• A2: Direct Answer (DA). This action leverages
parametric knowledge of LLMs to answer questions directly, without relying on any external
knowledge.
• A3: Retrieval-Answer (RA). This action retrieves
related knowledge from the external knowledge
base to support subsequent reasoning.

[PAGE 4]
Root Node
(User Query)
Ours RAG-O1-plus 以下展示的是推理过程的动作序列
System Analysis (SAY)
Direct Answer (DA)
Retrieval-Answer(RA)
Query Transformation (QT)
Summary-Answer(SA)
Other Advanced Technologies
External Knowledge
DA SAY
Tree-basedSolutionSpace
SARA QT
QT SA RA
RA
SA
SA
QT
SA
Thinking and Planning
RA
SA
self-consistency
n = 2
RA
Simplified
Automated Process Supervision
Fundamental Action Space
?
?
QT
RA
SA
QT RA
RA
SA
RA
SA
SA
RA SA
Solution = s0,s1,…,si-1
MonteCarlo(𝑞, s0:i-1) = 3/4
QT
···
···
···
···
QT
QT
QT
q, s0:i-1
Figure 2: The schematic diagram of our proposed AirRAG. AirRAG implements a paradigm that combines system
thinking with step-by-step reasoning. In the inference phase, we introduce MCTS and self-consistency to scaling
computation, which significantly outperforms other strong baselines.
• A4: Query Transformation (QT). This action
transforms human questions in order to improve
retrieval performance. It supports various transformations, such as rewriting, step back prompting, follow-up questions and multi-query retrieval.
• A5: Summary-Answer (SA). This action combines intermediate reasoning steps, answers and
the initial questions to generate the final answer.
The above five actions define a highly diverse action space {A1, A2, A3, A4, A5}. In the first step,
the initial state is denoted as s0 and then MCTS
selects the action a1 and a2 to prompt the LLM to
generate the next reasoning steps in parallel. Subsequent actions are performed sequentially to expand the reasoning path. It is important to note
that there are sequential dependencies between
different actions. For example, A1 and A2 can
only be executed after the root question. Additionally, we incorporate the diverse sampling of
self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023) for each action to expand the reasoning paths. Specifically, an
action is more likely to generate the correct reasoning step if we sample multiple times in the current
state. Finally, we can obtain multiple generated reasoning trajectories, such as [s0 ⊕ s1:n]. To further
improve inference efficiency, we choose the action
{A3, A4, A5} as a simplified action space, referred
to as AirRAG-Lite, which achieves a better balance
between efficiency and effectiveness.
3.2 Perform Reasoning Processes via MCTS
3.2.1 Solution Generation
Based on the action space defined above, we introduce MCTS to generate candidate reasoning trajectories. The initial root node, s0, represents the
question without any reasoning steps. The policy is directly modeled by a language model as
π(a|s) = LM(a|s), and the state transition function combines preceding reasoning steps with current actions, i.e., si = Concat(s0:i−1, aj). During each MCTS rollout, we execute multiple steps,
including selection, expansion, simulations, and
backpropagation. Multiple rollouts are performed
to expand the solution space. To balance the
exploration and exploitation, we adopt the wellknown Upper Confidence Bounds applied to Trees
(UCT) (Kocsis and Szepesvári, 2006) for node selection as follows:
UCT(s, p) = Q(s, a)
N (s) + w
s
log Np(s)
N (s) , (1)
where Q(s, a) is the reward value for node s, generated by taking action a, and is updated through
backpropagation. Q(s, a) serves as a key metric in MCTS to evaluate the value of each node.
N (s) denotes the number of visits to s, p is the
parent node of s, and w is the weight to balance

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: QT | QT.1 | SA | RA | SA.1 | QT.2 | ··· | RA.1 | SA.2
Row 1: QT: RA | QT.1: RA | SA: | RA: QT | SA.1: | QT.2: QT | ···: ··· | RA.1: RA | SA.2: SA
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
exploration and exploitation. Initially, all unexplored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0 , leading
to random tree expansions at the beginning. When
the search reaches a terminal node nd, a reward
score Q(sd, ad) is computed based on whether
the node reaches the correct answer. This score
is then back-propagated to all intermediate nodes
along the trajectory t = x ⊕ s1 ⊕ s2 ⊕ . . . ⊕ sd.
Specifically, for each intermediate node si (for
i = 1 , 2, . . . , d − 1), its Q value is updated as:
Q(si, ai) = Q(si, ai) + Q(sd, ad).
When the search reaches a terminal node, defined either by a terminal state or a predetermined
maximum tree depth d, we obtain a trajectory from
the root to the terminal node. All trajectories from
the rollout iterations are collected as candidate solutions. Section 3.3 explains how we select the
optimal answer node from these trajectories.
3.2.2 Inference Scaling
Numerous studies have demonstrated that scaling
inference computation can significantly improve
the performance of LLMs without additional training (Snell et al., 2024; Yue et al., 2024). Based on
the above methods, we explore strategies to leverage inference computation scaling in AirRAG. One
straightforward strategy is extending the effective
context length (short for Lmax) during the document retrieval phase, allowing more related documents to supplement the knowledge base. Additionally, we perform multiplerollouts to thoroughly
explore the solution space relying on the tree-based
search. Adjusting the number of output sequences
(n) generated during certain actions enables selfconsistency verification and further inference scaling. These strategies provide flexibility for scaling
inference computation in RAG, empowering LLMs
to address complex knowledge-intensive queries
more effectively.
To improve efficiency and minimize redundant
computations, we implement an early pruning strategy for state nodes and reasoning paths. Deduplication is applied to the output sequence states
generated by each action, ensuring the diversity
of the subsequent path. Furthermore, if multiple
rollouts select the same state sequence, only one
valid reasoning path is retained.
3.2.3 Flexible Architecture
Our tree-based architecture provides the flexibility
to integrate other advanced approaches. We reproduce the IterDRAG method based on the prompt
design by Yue et al. (2024). Meanwhile, inspired
by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fundamental action space to {A3, A4, A5}, enabling
a faster implementation while still achieving relatively good results. These methods serve as an
exploratory extension of our approach and can be
activated or deactivated as needed. Due to the
training-free nature of our method, its generator
LLM can be arbitrarily replaced with the strongest
existing models for performance improvement.
3.3 Select the Optimal Answer Node
For common mathematical reasoning tasks, a simple consistency-based method can efficiently select the most precise reasoning path. For example,
the most frequent number extracted from multiple
candidate solutions in MATH (Hendrycks et al.,
2021) can be chosen as the final answer. However, extracting precise answers and performing effective aggregation becomes more challenging for
knowledge-intensive tasks. To address this, we design two self-consistency verification methods for
such problems. Jaccard similarity and text embeddings are two different approaches used in natural
language processing to measure the similarity between texts. We apply these methods to cluster text
answers and compute answer scores as follows:
jcdScorei = 1
N
NX
j=1
|Ai ∩ Aj|
|Ai ∪ Aj| , (2)
embScorei = 1
N
NX
j=1
cos(Ei, Ej), (3)
where N is the number of valid answer nodes, Ai is
the word-level set of answer text i, and Ei denotes
the embedding vector of answer text i.
In addition, we further investigate the self-refine
and process-supervision reward model to identify the most accurate reasoning trajectory. Selfrefinement uses the A5 (Summary-Answer) action
to refine the final answer from all candidate answer
nodes. The reward modeling process consists of
two steps: data synthesis and instruction tuning.
• Data synthesis: We leverage MCTS to perform multiple rollouts on partial training sets.
Based on known ground truth, we sample positive and negative reasoning trajectories and
use Monte Carlo estimation to evaluate intermediate state scores.

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the funRow 1: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: to random tree expansions at the beginning. When damental action space to {A3, A4, A5}, enabling
Row 2: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: the search reaches a terminal node nd, a reward a faster implementation while still achieving relRow 3: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: score Q(sd, ad) is computed based on whether atively good results. These methods serve as an
Row 4: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: the node reaches the correct answer. This score exploratory extension of our approach and can be
Row 5: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: is then back-propagated to all intermediate nodes activated or deactivated as needed. Due to the
Row 6: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: along the trajectory t = x ⊕ s1 ⊕ s2 ⊕ . . . ⊕ sd. training-free nature of our method, its generator
Row 7: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: Specifically, for each intermediate node si (for LLM can be arbitrarily replaced with the strongest
Row 8: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: i = 1, 2, . . . , d − 1), its Q value is updated as: existing models for performance improvement.
Row 9: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: Q(si, ai) = Q(si, ai) +Q(sd, ad).
Row 10: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: When the search reaches a terminal node, de- 3.3 Select the Optimal Answer Node
Row 11: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: fined either by a terminal state or a predetermined
Row 12: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: For common mathematical reasoning tasks, a simRow 13: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: maximum tree depth d, we obtain a trajectory from
Row 14: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: ple consistency-based method can efficiently seRow 15: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: the root to the terminal node. All trajectories from
Row 16: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: lect the most precise reasoning path. For example,
Row 17: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: the rollout iterations are collected as candidate soRow 18: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: the most frequent number extracted from multiple
Row 19: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: lutions. Section 3.3 explains how we select the
Row 20: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: candidate solutions in MATH (Hendrycks et al.,
Row 21: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: optimal answer node from these trajectories.
Row 22: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: 2021) can be chosen as the final answer. HowRow 23: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: ever, extracting precise answers and performing ef-3.2.2 Inference Scaling
Row 24: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: fective aggregation becomes more challenging for
Row 25: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: Numerous studies have demonstrated that scaling
Row 26: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: knowledge-intensive tasks. To address this, we deRow 27: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: inference computation can significantly improve
Row 28: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: sign two self-consistency verification methods for
Row 29: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: the performance of LLMs without additional trainRow 30: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: such problems. Jaccard similarity and text embedRow 31: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: ing (Snell et al., 2024; Yue et al., 2024). Based on
Row 32: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: dings are two different approaches used in natural
Row 33: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: the above methods, we explore strategies to leverRow 34: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: language processing to measure the similarity beRow 35: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: age inference computation scaling in AirRAG. One
Row 36: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: tween texts. We apply these methods to cluster text
Row 37: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: straightforward strategy is extending the effective
Row 38: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: answers and compute answer scores as follows:
Row 39: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: context length (short for Lmax) during the docuRow 40: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: ment retrieval phase, allowing more related docu- N
Row 41: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: 1 ∑ |A ∩A |
Row 42: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: ments to supplement the knowledge base. Addi- jcdScorei = i j, (2)
Row 43: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: tionally, we perform multiple rollouts to thoroughly N j=1|Ai ∪Aj |
Row 44: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: explore the solution space relying on the tree-based N
Row 45: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: 1 ∑
Row 46: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: search. Adjusting the number of output sequences embScorei = cos(Ei, Ej), (3)
Row 47: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: N(n) generated during certain actions enables self- j=1
Row 48: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: consistency verification and further inference scalRow 49: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: ing. These strategies provide flexibility for scaling where N is the number of valid answer nodes, Ai is
Row 50: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: inference computation in RAG, empowering LLMs the word-level set of answer text i, and Ei denotes
Row 51: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: to address complex knowledge-intensive queries the embedding vector of answer text i.
Row 52: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: more effectively. In addition, we further investigate the self-refine
Row 53: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: To improve efficiency and minimize redundant and process-supervision reward model to idenRow 54: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: computations, we implement an early pruning strat- tify the most accurate reasoning trajectory. SelfRow 55: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: egy for state nodes and reasoning paths. Dedu- refinement uses the A5 (Summary-Answer) action
Row 56: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: plication is applied to the output sequence states to refine the final answer from all candidate answer
Row 57: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: generated by each action, ensuring the diversity nodes. The reward modeling process consists of
Row 58: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: of the subsequent path. Furthermore, if multiple two steps: data synthesis and instruction tuning.
Row 59: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: rollouts select the same state sequence, only one
Row 60: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: valid reasoning path is retained. • Data synthesis: We leverage MCTS to perRow 61: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: form multiple rollouts on partial training sets.
Row 62: plored nodes are assigned Q(si, ai) = 0, leading by its iterative implementation, we simplify the fun-: 3.2.3 Flexible Architecture Based on known ground truth, we sample pos-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
• Instruction tuning: Synthetic samples are
used to fine-tune a relatively small LLM, such
as Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct.
4 Experiments
In this section, we conducted experiments on complex QA benchmarks by answering the following
research questions.
• RQ1: Does AirRAG outperform state-of-theart baselines?
• RQ2: How does AirRAG perform when it
comes to comprehensive inference scaling?
• RQ3: What is the performance benefit of AirRAG in optimizing the allocation of inference
computation?
• RQ4: How does AirRAG perform for various
verification methods for multiple candidate
rollouts?
• RQ5: What is the intuitive efficiency and performance of AirRAG in the reasoning process?
4.1 Experimental Settings
4.1.1 Datasets
To evaluate the effectiveness of AirRAG, we conduct experiments on various question-answering
(QA) tasks, including both open-domain QA
and multi-hop QA. The complex multi-hop QA
datasets consist of HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018),
MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022) and 2WikiMultiHopQA (2Wiki) (Ho et al., 2020). Other
single-hop QA datasets include Natural Questions
(NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), TriviaQA (Joshi
et al., 2017), PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023) and WebQA (Berant et al., 2013).
4.1.2 Implementation Details
We use the hyperparameters reported for the existing models whenever available. Implementation
details are available in the Appendix A.
4.1.3 Baselines and Metrics
To investigate the enhancement effects of thinking and planning on complex RAG tasks, we compare it with vanilla RAG, which performs only a
single retrieval and generation process. We evaluate the naive generators of Qwen2.5 (Yang et al.,
2024) series instruction models and Llama3-8BInstruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024). In the retrieval
phase, we employ multilingual-e5-base (Wang
et al., 2024) as the retriever and utilize the widely
used Wikipedia dump from December 2018 as the
retrieval corpus (Karpukhin et al., 2020). The
prompt of vanilla RAG are shown in the Appendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare AirRAG with Iter-RetGen (Shao et al., 2023), SelfRAG (Asai et al., 2024), Auto-RAG (Yu et al.,
2024), and IterDRAG (Yue et al., 2024). For agentic retrieval, we compare AirRAG with Searcho1 (Li et al., 2025), ReSearch (Chen et al., 2025),
and DeepResearcher (Zheng et al., 2025). To further explore RAG performance and inference computation scaling, we focus on a comparison with
IterDRAG for a given budget on inference computation. For evaluation metrics, we report Exact
Match (EM), F1 score (F1) and Accuracy (Acc)
between the generated summary and gold answer,
where accuracy measures whether the gold answer
is covered in the generated answer.
4.2 Main Results (RQ1)
We first evaluate the performance of AirRAG on
various complex QA datasets. Table 1 compares
its accuracy and F1 scores with strong baselines
based on LLMs of different scales. The optimal
performance exhibits consistent gains as the LLMs
scale up. For the Qwen2.5-7b-instruct model, our
approach achieves the best performance, even surpassing the trainable approaches. To further validate its effectiveness on large-scale reasoning models, we also conduct experiments on Qwen3-235B
in both the thinking mode and non-thinking mode.
In thinking mode, our approach achieves state-ofthe-art performance among all datasets. In addition, to verify the robustness and generalization
of AirRAG, Table 5 shows the performance on
more diverse LLMs and datasets. We observe consistent improvements over vanilla RAG and existing iterative methods (more than 10% on average). The significant boost over IterDRAG and
Auto-RAG suggests that AirRAG explores more
effective reasoning paths through the human-like
thinking paradigm and tree-based search.
4.3 Inference Scaling for RAG (RQ2)
Inference computation scaling can enable LLMs
to improve their output performance (Snell et al.,
2024). Self-consistency can also improve the robustness of the reasoning process (Wang et al.,
2023). Therefore, we carry out a comprehensive
experimental analysis on the inference computation

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: In this section, we conducted experiments on com- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare AirRow 1: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: plex QA benchmarks by answering the following | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: RAG with Iter-RetGen (Shao et al., 2023), SelfRow 2: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: research questions. | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: RAG (Asai et al., 2024), Auto-RAG (Yu et al.,
Row 3: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: 2024), and IterDRAG (Yue et al., 2024). For agenRow 4: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: • RQ1: Does AirRAG outperform state-of-the- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: tic retrieval, we compare AirRAG with SearchRow 5: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: art baselines? | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: o1 (Li et al., 2025), ReSearch (Chen et al., 2025),
Row 6: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: and DeepResearcher (Zheng et al., 2025). To furRow 7: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: • RQ2: How does AirRAG perform when it | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 8: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: ther explore RAG performance and inference comRow 9: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: comes to comprehensive inference scaling? | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 10: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: putation scaling, we focus on a comparison with
Row 11: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: • RQ3: What is the performance benefit of Air- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: IterDRAG for a given budget on inference comRow 12: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: RAG in optimizing the allocation of inference | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: putation. For evaluation metrics, we report Exact
Row 13: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: computation? | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: Match (EM), F1 score (F1) and Accuracy (Acc)
Row 14: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: between the generated summary and gold answer,
Row 15: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: • RQ4: How does AirRAG perform for various | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: where accuracy measures whether the gold answer
Row 16: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: verification methods for multiple candidate | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: is covered in the generated answer.
Row 17: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: rollouts? | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 18: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: 4.2 Main Results (RQ1)
Row 19: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: • RQ5: What is the intuitive efficiency and per- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 20: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: We first evaluate the performance of AirRAG on
Row 21: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: formance of AirRAG in the reasoning pro- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 22: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: various complex QA datasets. Table 1 compares
Row 23: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: cess? | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 24: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: its accuracy and F1 scores with strong baselines
Row 25: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: 4.1 Experimental Settings | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: based on LLMs of different scales. The optimal
Row 26: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: performance exhibits consistent gains as the LLMs
Row 27: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: 4.1.1 Datasets | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 28: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: scale up. For the Qwen2.5-7b-instruct model, our
Row 29: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: To evaluate the effectiveness of AirRAG, we con- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 30: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: approach achieves the best performance, even surRow 31: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: duct experiments on various question-answering | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 32: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: passing the trainable approaches. To further valiRow 33: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: (QA) tasks, including both open-domain QA | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 34: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: date its effectiveness on large-scale reasoning modRow 35: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: and multi-hop QA. The complex multi-hop QA | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 36: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: els, we also conduct experiments on Qwen3-235B
Row 37: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: datasets consist of HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 38: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: in both the thinking mode and non-thinking mode.
Row 39: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022) and 2WikiMul- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 40: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: In thinking mode, our approach achieves state-ofRow 41: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: tiHopQA (2Wiki) (Ho et al., 2020). Other | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 42: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: the-art performance among all datasets. In addiRow 43: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: single-hop QA datasets include Natural Questions | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 44: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: tion, to verify the robustness and generalization
Row 45: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: (NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), TriviaQA (Joshi | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 46: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: of AirRAG, Table 5 shows the performance on
Row 47: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: et al., 2017), PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023) and We- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 48: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: more diverse LLMs and datasets. We observe conRow 49: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: bQA (Berant et al., 2013). | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 50: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: sistent improvements over vanilla RAG and exRow 51: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: 4.1.2 Implementation Details | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: isting iterative methods (more than 10% on averRow 52: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: We use the hyperparameters reported for the exist- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: age). The significant boost over IterDRAG and
Row 53: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: ing models whenever available. Implementation | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: Auto-RAG suggests that AirRAG explores more
Row 54: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: details are available in the Appendix A. | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: effective reasoning paths through the human-like
Row 55: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: thinking paradigm and tree-based search.
Row 56: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: 4.1.3 Baselines and Metrics | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-:
Row 57: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: To investigate the enhancement effects of think- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: 4.3 Inference Scaling for RAG (RQ2)
Row 58: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: ing and planning on complex RAG tasks, we com- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: Inference computation scaling can enable LLMs
Row 59: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: pare it with vanilla RAG, which performs only a | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: to improve their output performance (Snell et al.,
Row 60: In this section, we conducted experiments on com-: single retrieval and generation process. We evalu- | pendix C. For iterative retrieval, we compare Air-: 2024). Self-consistency can also improve the ro-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
Method NQ TriviaQA HotpotQA MuSiQue 2Wiki Average
F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc
Qwen2.5-7B
ZeroShot QA 38.4 37.4 57.7 56.3 36.1 34.8 9.1 7.5 45.0 44.1 37.3 36.0
Vanilla RAG 57.8 53.9 70.1 66.3 61.3 56.9 13.5 8.3 45.9 42.8 49.7 45.6
IterDRAG∗ 58.3 54.1 73.5 69.1 65.3 60.7 18.3 13.0 51.8 47.0 53.4 48.8
Search-o1∗ 57.8 54.3 72.6 69.8 57.3 54.2 20.2 18.5 56.9 53.6 53.0 50.1
ReSearch∗ 61.3 59.6 76.2 73.4 70.3 68.1 30.9 27.4 62.5 61.0 60.2 57.9
DeepResearcher 62.4 59.8 75.9 73.2 67.6 63.9 33.9 27.8 65.4 62.3 61.0 57.4
AirRAG-Lite 60.8 57.3 74.1 70.0 68.2 63.2 23.4 17.3 51.1 48.0 55.5 51.2
AirRAG 60.4 56.2 74.3 70.1 74.9 70.0 30.3 23.6 65.7 63.2 61.1 56.6
Qwen2.5-14B
ZeroShot QA 47.1 46.3 70.7 69.5 42.5 41.3 13.5 12.1 48.2 47.3 44.4 43.3
Vanilla RAG 62.0 58.2 75.2 71.2 67.0 62.0 20.0 14.4 52.0 49.4 55.2 51.0
IterDRAG∗ 58.5 53.9 76.4 72.3 71.8 66.2 23.9 17.2 57.4 54.1 57.6 52.7
Search-o1∗ 61.2 59.7 74.3 72.6 71.4 67.4 23.2 20.4 58.1 55.8 57.6 55.2
AirRAG-Lite 64.8 60.9 78.9 75.0 77.2 72.5 30.3 24.3 70.3 68.0 64.3 60.1
AirRAG 66.2 62.1 78.1 73.8 79.9 75.3 36.0 31.9 70.4 68.7 66.1 62.4
Qwen2.5-32B
ZeroShot QA 46.8 45.9 69.8 68.8 42.9 41.8 11.1 9.6 48.1 47.2 43.7 42.7
Vanilla RAG 60.6 56.7 75.4 71.6 66.5 62.5 19.5 13.8 51.8 49.6 54.7 50.8
IterDRAG∗ 61.1 56.7 76.9 73.0 72.0 67.3 23.3 17.9 58.2 55.4 58.3 54.1
Search-o1∗ 63.5 61.6 75.6 72.8 72.8 68.4 30.2 27.3 60.5 58.9 60.5 57.8
ReSearch∗ 63.8 61.2 74.6 72.3 76.2 72.6 38.3 33.4 66.8 62.8 63.9 60.5
AirRAG-Lite 65.6 61.9 75.8 71.6 79.3 74.8 33.3 32.5 72.0 70.8 65.2 62.3
AirRAG 66.5 62.7 78.9 74.6 81.1 76.1 36.5 32.7 71.9 70.6 67.0 63.3
Qwen3-235B (non-thinking)
ZeroShot QA 64.1 63.7 77.1 76.3 53.9 52.9 17.1 15.7 56.8 56.1 53.8 52.9
Vanilla RAG 66.0 65.3 78.0 76.2 69.2 67.7 20.8 19.1 53.3 52.2 57.4 56.1
IterDRAG∗ 65.7 63.3 78.8 76.9 75.5 69.7 32.2 25.2 64.8 60.8 63.4 59.2
Search-o1∗ 67.3 66.2 77.3 76.4 75.9 73.8 36.7 34.2 71.3 68.2 65.7 63.7
AirRAG-Lite 67.7 66.9 77.6 75.8 78.3 76.8 43.7 36.5 74.9 74.1 68.4 65.7
AirRAG 66.4 65.6 79.1 77.3 79.6 78.1 47.2 40.0 76.2 75.5 69.7 67.3
Qwen3-235B (thinking)
ZeroShot QA 66.1 65.6 79.3 78.6 54.2 53.5 21.3 19.9 56.6 56.3 55.5 54.8
Vanilla RAG 67.6 67.1 77.9 76.9 72.5 71.9 18.2 16.4 57.5 56.6 58.7 57.8
IterDRAG∗ 68.8 67.1 80.9 78.7 76.3 71.1 30.0 23.1 67.1 64.5 64.6 60.9
Search-o1∗ 67.2 66.4 78.1 77.5 75.2 72.4 33.4 28.9 69.2 66.3 64.6 62.3
AirRAG-Lite 73.2 72.7 81.1 80.1 86.2 85.6 44.2 37.8 76.4 75.6 72.2 70.3
AirRAG 74.3 72.8 81.4 80.1 84.7 84.0 47.5 40.3 76.8 76.2 72.9 70.7
Table 1: Overall evaluation results on the test sets of five datasets. * indicates the results reproduced by us. The best
results for each model are in bold. The number of both rollouts and output sequences is set to 1. The number of
documents for a single retrieval is set to 5.
scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG scenario, there are multiple ways to optimize the use
of inference computation resources. Specifically,
we can adjust both the number of retrieved documents in a single retrieval and the effective context
length in all iterations. The average performance of
three datasets exhibits consistent gains in Figure 3.
In subsequent experiments, unless otherwise specified, the data presented represent the average performance across the HotpotQA, MuSiQue, and 2Wiki
datasets. In particular, the initial computation scaling brings significant performance improvements.
In addition, the number of output sequences and
rollouts in MCTS can expand the solution space
and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in
Figure 1, the average performance increases with
the number of output sequences per action, demonstrating the effectiveness of self-consistency. We
also investigate the number of effective reasoning
paths under different rollouts in Figure 4. The performance improvement caused by the increase of
effective reasoning paths in the early stage is relatively high. We provide additional dataset-specific
results in Appendix B.
4.4 Ablation Studies
Effect of Computationally Optimal Strategies
(RQ3). Extensive experiments show that the out-

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | NQ | TriviaQA | HotpotQA | MuSiQue | 2Wiki | Average
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Method | Unnamed: 1: | NQ: | TriviaQA: | HotpotQA: | MuSiQue: | 2Wiki: | Average:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: F1 | NQ: Acc | TriviaQA: F1 Acc | HotpotQA: F1 Acc | MuSiQue: F1 Acc | 2Wiki: F1 Acc | Average: F1 Acc
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Qwen2.5-7B | Unnamed: 1: | NQ: | TriviaQA: | HotpotQA: | MuSiQue: | 2Wiki: | Average:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: ZeroShot QA | Unnamed: 1: 38.4 | NQ: 37.4 | TriviaQA: 57.7 56.3 | HotpotQA: 36.1 34.8 | MuSiQue: 9.1 7.5 | 2Wiki: 45.0 44.1 | Average: 37.3 36.0
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Vanilla RAG | Unnamed: 1: 57.8 | NQ: 53.9 | TriviaQA: 70.1 66.3 | HotpotQA: 61.3 56.9 | MuSiQue: 13.5 8.3 | 2Wiki: 45.9 42.8 | Average: 49.7 45.6
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: ∗IterDRAG | Unnamed: 1: 58.3 | NQ: 54.1 | TriviaQA: 73.5 69.1 | HotpotQA: 65.3 60.7 | MuSiQue: 18.3 13.0 | 2Wiki: 51.8 47.0 | Average: 53.4 48.8
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: ∗Search-o1 | Unnamed: 1: 57.8 | NQ: 54.3 | TriviaQA: 72.6 69.8 | HotpotQA: 57.3 54.2 | MuSiQue: 20.2 18.5 | 2Wiki: 56.9 53.6 | Average: 53.0 50.1
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: ∗ReSearch | Unnamed: 1: 61.3 | NQ: 59.6 | TriviaQA: 76.2 73.4 | HotpotQA: 70.3 68.1 | MuSiQue: 30.9 27.4 | 2Wiki: 62.5 61.0 | Average: 60.2 57.9
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: DeepResearcher | Unnamed: 1: 62.4 | NQ: 59.8 | TriviaQA: 75.9 73.2 | HotpotQA: 67.6 63.9 | MuSiQue: 33.9 27.8 | 2Wiki: 65.4 62.3 | Average: 61.0 57.4
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG-Lite | Unnamed: 1: 60.8 | NQ: 57.3 | TriviaQA: 74.1 70.0 | HotpotQA: 68.2 63.2 | MuSiQue: 23.4 17.3 | 2Wiki: 51.1 48.0 | Average: 55.5 51.2
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG | Unnamed: 1: 60.4 | NQ: 56.2 | TriviaQA: 74.3 70.1 | HotpotQA: 74.9 70.0 | MuSiQue: 30.3 23.6 | 2Wiki: 65.7 63.2 | Average: 61.1 56.6
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: Qwen2.5-14B | Unnamed: 1: | NQ: | TriviaQA: | HotpotQA: | MuSiQue: | 2Wiki: | Average:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: ZeroShot QA | Unnamed: 1: 47.1 | NQ: 46.3 | TriviaQA: 70.7 69.5 | HotpotQA: 42.5 41.3 | MuSiQue: 13.5 12.1 | 2Wiki: 48.2 47.3 | Average: 44.4 43.3
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: Vanilla RAG | Unnamed: 1: 62.0 | NQ: 58.2 | TriviaQA: 75.2 71.2 | HotpotQA: 67.0 62.0 | MuSiQue: 20.0 14.4 | 2Wiki: 52.0 49.4 | Average: 55.2 51.0
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: ∗IterDRAG | Unnamed: 1: 58.5 | NQ: 53.9 | TriviaQA: 76.4 72.3 | HotpotQA: 71.8 66.2 | MuSiQue: 23.9 17.2 | 2Wiki: 57.4 54.1 | Average: 57.6 52.7
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: ∗Search-o1 | Unnamed: 1: 61.2 | NQ: 59.7 | TriviaQA: 74.3 72.6 | HotpotQA: 71.4 67.4 | MuSiQue: 23.2 20.4 | 2Wiki: 58.1 55.8 | Average: 57.6 55.2
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG-Lite | Unnamed: 1: 64.8 | NQ: 60.9 | TriviaQA: 78.9 75.0 | HotpotQA: 77.2 72.5 | MuSiQue: 30.3 24.3 | 2Wiki: 70.3 68.0 | Average: 64.3 60.1
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG | Unnamed: 1: 66.2 | NQ: 62.1 | TriviaQA: 78.1 73.8 | HotpotQA: 79.9 75.3 | MuSiQue: 36.0 31.9 | 2Wiki: 70.4 68.7 | Average: 66.1 62.4
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: Qwen2.5-32B | Unnamed: 1: | NQ: | TriviaQA: | HotpotQA: | MuSiQue: | 2Wiki: | Average:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: ZeroShot QA | Unnamed: 1: 46.8 | NQ: 45.9 | TriviaQA: 69.8 68.8 | HotpotQA: 42.9 41.8 | MuSiQue: 11.1 9.6 | 2Wiki: 48.1 47.2 | Average: 43.7 42.7
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: Vanilla RAG | Unnamed: 1: 60.6 | NQ: 56.7 | TriviaQA: 75.4 71.6 | HotpotQA: 66.5 62.5 | MuSiQue: 19.5 13.8 | 2Wiki: 51.8 49.6 | Average: 54.7 50.8
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: ∗IterDRAG | Unnamed: 1: 61.1 | NQ: 56.7 | TriviaQA: 76.9 73.0 | HotpotQA: 72.0 67.3 | MuSiQue: 23.3 17.9 | 2Wiki: 58.2 55.4 | Average: 58.3 54.1
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: ∗Search-o1 | Unnamed: 1: 63.5 | NQ: 61.6 | TriviaQA: 75.6 72.8 | HotpotQA: 72.8 68.4 | MuSiQue: 30.2 27.3 | 2Wiki: 60.5 58.9 | Average: 60.5 57.8
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: ∗ReSearch | Unnamed: 1: 63.8 | NQ: 61.2 | TriviaQA: 74.6 72.3 | HotpotQA: 76.2 72.6 | MuSiQue: 38.3 33.4 | 2Wiki: 66.8 62.8 | Average: 63.9 60.5
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG-Lite | Unnamed: 1: 65.6 | NQ: 61.9 | TriviaQA: 75.8 71.6 | HotpotQA: 79.3 74.8 | MuSiQue: 33.3 32.5 | 2Wiki: 72.0 70.8 | Average: 65.2 62.3
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG | Unnamed: 1: 66.5 | NQ: 62.7 | TriviaQA: 78.9 74.6 | HotpotQA: 81.1 76.1 | MuSiQue: 36.5 32.7 | 2Wiki: 71.9 70.6 | Average: 67.0 63.3
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: Qwen3-235B (non-thinking) | Unnamed: 1: | NQ: | TriviaQA: | HotpotQA: | MuSiQue: | 2Wiki: | Average:
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: ZeroShot QA | Unnamed: 1: 64.1 | NQ: 63.7 | TriviaQA: 77.1 76.3 | HotpotQA: 53.9 52.9 | MuSiQue: 17.1 15.7 | 2Wiki: 56.8 56.1 | Average: 53.8 52.9
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: Vanilla RAG | Unnamed: 1: 66.0 | NQ: 65.3 | TriviaQA: 78.0 76.2 | HotpotQA: 69.2 67.7 | MuSiQue: 20.8 19.1 | 2Wiki: 53.3 52.2 | Average: 57.4 56.1
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: ∗IterDRAG | Unnamed: 1: 65.7 | NQ: 63.3 | TriviaQA: 78.8 76.9 | HotpotQA: 75.5 69.7 | MuSiQue: 32.2 25.2 | 2Wiki: 64.8 60.8 | Average: 63.4 59.2
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: ∗Search-o1 | Unnamed: 1: 67.3 | NQ: 66.2 | TriviaQA: 77.3 76.4 | HotpotQA: 75.9 73.8 | MuSiQue: 36.7 34.2 | 2Wiki: 71.3 68.2 | Average: 65.7 63.7
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG-Lite | Unnamed: 1: 67.7 | NQ: 66.9 | TriviaQA: 77.6 75.8 | HotpotQA: 78.3 76.8 | MuSiQue: 43.7 36.5 | 2Wiki: 74.9 74.1 | Average: 68.4 65.7
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG | Unnamed: 1: 66.4 | NQ: 65.6 | TriviaQA: 79.1 77.3 | HotpotQA: 79.6 78.1 | MuSiQue: 47.2 40.0 | 2Wiki: 76.2 75.5 | Average: 69.7 67.3
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: Qwen3-235B (thinking) | Unnamed: 1: | NQ: | TriviaQA: | HotpotQA: | MuSiQue: | 2Wiki: | Average:
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: ZeroShot QA | Unnamed: 1: 66.1 | NQ: 65.6 | TriviaQA: 79.3 78.6 | HotpotQA: 54.2 53.5 | MuSiQue: 21.3 19.9 | 2Wiki: 56.6 56.3 | Average: 55.5 54.8
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: Vanilla RAG | Unnamed: 1: 67.6 | NQ: 67.1 | TriviaQA: 77.9 76.9 | HotpotQA: 72.5 71.9 | MuSiQue: 18.2 16.4 | 2Wiki: 57.5 56.6 | Average: 58.7 57.8
Row 37: Unnamed: 0: ∗IterDRAG | Unnamed: 1: 68.8 | NQ: 67.1 | TriviaQA: 80.9 78.7 | HotpotQA: 76.3 71.1 | MuSiQue: 30.0 23.1 | 2Wiki: 67.1 64.5 | Average: 64.6 60.9
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: ∗Search-o1 | Unnamed: 1: 67.2 | NQ: 66.4 | TriviaQA: 78.1 77.5 | HotpotQA: 75.2 72.4 | MuSiQue: 33.4 28.9 | 2Wiki: 69.2 66.3 | Average: 64.6 62.3
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG-Lite | Unnamed: 1: 73.2 | NQ: 72.7 | TriviaQA: 81.1 80.1 | HotpotQA: 86.2 85.6 | MuSiQue: 44.2 37.8 | 2Wiki: 76.4 75.6 | Average: 72.2 70.3
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG | Unnamed: 1: 74.3 | NQ: 72.8 | TriviaQA: 81.4 80.1 | HotpotQA: 84.7 84.0 | MuSiQue: 47.5 40.3 | 2Wiki: 76.8 76.2 | Average: 72.9 70.7
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=2]
Columns: scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG sce- | and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in
Row 1: scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG sce-: nario, there are multiple ways to optimize the use | and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in: Figure 1, the average performance increases with
Row 2: scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG sce-: of inference computation resources. Specifically, | and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in: the number of output sequences per action, demonRow 3: scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG sce-: we can adjust both the number of retrieved docu- | and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in: strating the effectiveness of self-consistency. We
Row 4: scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG sce-: ments in a single retrieval and the effective context | and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in: also investigate the number of effective reasoning
Row 5: scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG sce-: length in all iterations. The average performance of | and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in: paths under different rollouts in Figure 4. The perRow 6: scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG sce-: three datasets exhibits consistent gains in Figure 3. | and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in: formance improvement caused by the increase of
Row 7: scaling. Based on tree-based search and RAG sce-: In subsequent experiments, unless otherwise speci- | and explore potential reasoning paths. As shown in: effective reasoning paths in the early stage is rela-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
5 10 20 30 40 50
65Accuracy
5 10 20 30 40 50
85Recall
816 32 64 128
65Accuracy
816 32 64 128
85Recall
AirRAG
AirRAG-Lite
IterDRAG
Number of Documents Effective Context Length (k)
Figure 3: Impact of the retrieved document number scaling (Left) and the maximum context length scaling (Right)
on model performance (averaged Accuracy and Recall of three datasets). All methods show consistent performance
improvements as the effective inference computation scales.
Method Average
F1 Acc
Vanilla RAG 47.0 43.2
IterDRAG 49.8 45.9
AirRAG
+ nall=1 62.9 58.8
+ nall=3 63.4 62.1
+ na1,a4=3, na2,a3,a5=1 63.2 62.0
+ na1,a4=3, na2,a3,a5=1, qdiv=1.0 65.1 63.9
Table 2: Performance comparison with different computationally optimal strategies on the HotpotQA, MuSiQue
and 2Wiki datasets. nai denotes the number of output
sequences of the action ai in a single extension. qdiv
indicates that setting top-p to 1.0 and temperature to 1.0
for query-related actions, i.e. SAY and QT, increases
the diversity of reasoning. The default sampling parameters top-p, top-k and temperature are set to 0.8, 50 and
0.7 respectively. Rational sampling strategies further
improve performance across multiple datasets.
puts of certain actions (e.g., RA, DA and SA) are
almost consistent when performing multiple generations. Therefore, we only increase the number
of output sequences (short for n) for the remaining
actions (e.g., SAY and QT), which reduces invalid
inference computation while maintaining good results. This also reflects that this kind of reasoning
action, which effectively activates the creativity of
LLMs, requires more diversified sampling strategies. We adjust the sampling parameters (top-p=1.0
and temperature=1.0) to improve the diversity of
the model output. The complete experimental results in Table 2 show that the diversity of key actions can significantly improve performance.
From the aforementioned experiments, it is observed that the recall and accuracy of model are
linearly correlated. Intuitively, the size of document database is also related to the recall score. By
reducing the scale of the document database, we
10e410e510e62e7
Size of the Document Database
90 Accuracy
Recall
F1
1 2 4 8 16 32
Number of rollouts
66Accuracy
1.0
1.9
3.4
4.8
6.7
9.2Accuracy
Valid rollouts
Figure 4: Left: Performance comparison under different
size of document database. A streamlined database can
maintain a better performance. Right: Performance
comparison in increasing the number of valid rollouts.
Sampling a higher number of diverse reasoning paths
consistently improves accuracy.
find a gradual improvement in model performance
(shown in Figure 4). This observation provides
experimental evidence for effective database partitioning in practical application.
Effect of Verification Methods (RQ4). The larger
search space also generates more candidate reasoning trajectories. Therefore, how to select the optimal trajectory is crucial for the final performance.
We compare multiple verification methods with the
average scores of all candidates in Figure 7. These
two self-consistency verification methods are always slightly better than the average score, but they
are not nearly as good as the SA and QwenRM
methods. The SA method uses the LLM to further
refine the final answer from all candidate rollouts,
which is simple and effective. Finally, the reward
model achieves the most competitive results due
to the introduction of supervised information on
key intermediate reasoning steps in the training process. However, collecting process-supervised training samples requires high computational costs and
high-quality raw data. In the practical application
scenario, we can choose the appropriate method

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: AccuracyMethod Average | 90 Accuracy | 66 | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | 9.2 | 9 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3
Row 1: AccuracyMethod Average: F1 Acc | 90 Accuracy: 85 Recall F1 | 66: 64 | Unnamed: 0: Valid rollouts | Unnamed: 1: 6.7 | 9.2: | 9: 87.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 2: AccuracyMethod Average: | 90 Accuracy: 80 | 66: 62 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 9.2: | 9: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 3: AccuracyMethod Average: Vanilla RAG 47.0 43.2 | 90 Accuracy: | 66: 60 | Unnamed: 0: 4.8 | Unnamed: 1: | 9.2: | 9: 6.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 4: AccuracyMethod Average: IterDRAG 49.8 45.9 | 90 Accuracy: 75 | 66: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 9.2: | 9: 5.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 5: AccuracyMethod Average: | 90 Accuracy: | 66: 58 | Unnamed: 0: 3.4 | Unnamed: 1: | 9.2: | 9: 4.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: Accuracy
Row 6: AccuracyMethod Average: AirRAG | 90 Accuracy: 70 | 66: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 9.2: | 9: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 7: AccuracyMethod Average: | 90 Accuracy: | 66: 56 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 9.2: | 9: 3.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 8: AccuracyMethod Average: + n all =1 62.9 58.8 | 90 Accuracy: 265 | 66: 54 | Unnamed: 0: 1.91.0 | Unnamed: 1: | 9.2: | 9: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 9: AccuracyMethod Average: + nall=3 63.4 62.1 | 90 Accuracy: | 66: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | 9.2: | 9: 1.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
Row 10: AccuracyMethod Average: + n a 62.01,a4 =3, n a2,a3,a5 =1 63.2 | 90 Accuracy: 60 2e7 10e6 10e5 | 66: 52 10e4 | Unnamed: 0: 1 2 4 8 | Unnamed: 1: 16.0 | 9.2: 32.0 | 9: 0.0 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
Lmax Method database_size retrieval_time retrieval_number e2e
8k
Vanilla RAG 100w 0.900 1.00 3.828
IterDRAG 100w 1.833 2.04 6.703
AirRAG-Lite 100w 2.205 2.25 8.482
AirRAG 100w 3.453 3.84 12.752
Table 3: Performance analysis of inference efficiency. Lmax denotes the maximum number of input tokens across
all rollouts. The retrieved database contains approximately one million documents. e2e and retrieval_time denote
the average total time for a single question-answering process and the time spent on retrieval respectively, measured
in seconds. Other inference configurations remain consistent with those in Table 4.
while balancing efficiency and effectiveness.
4.5 Inference Efficiency and Qualitative
Analysis (RQ5)
Given the inherently large search space for the
tree-based search, we design computational optimization strategies for different actions to avoid
redundant and inefficient expansions, as shown in
Table 2. Furthermore, in Section 3.2.2, we propose
pruning strategies for state nodes and reasoning
paths. These optimizations significantly reduce inefficient LLM inference and repetitive path exploration. In practical applications, we can select appropriate configuration parameters such as rollout,
n, and Lmax based on computational resource budgets and time constraints, ensuring effectiveness
while achieving inference efficiency comparable to
current mainstream iterative RAG approaches. We
analyze the average inference efficiency per sample
on the HotpotQA dataset in Table 3. By combining
these results with those reported in Table 4 and Table 1, we are able to analyze the trade-offs between
computational cost and performance.
To make it easier to understand why our proposed AirRAG works, we present a qualitative
analysis in MuSiQue. Existing iterative methods
are often trapped in a single solution space when
confronted with complex tasks. As illustrated in
Figure 13, these iterative methods exhibit a key
limitation that insufficient or ambiguous retrieval
context can lead to repetitive follow-up queries
until it reaches the predefined maximum depth of
iterations. This inefficient iteration results in high
computational cost and incorrect answer. In contrast, AirRAG designs efficient reasoning actions
to achieve autonomous planning and reasoning. As
shown in Figure 14, the SAY action decomposes
the original query into a more rational sequence
of sub-queries, and then the combination of RA
and QT ensures the accuracy of the intermediate
reasoning step. We eventually leverage the efficient
reasoning trajectory to obtain the correct answer.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we propose AirRAG, a novel RAG
approach to fully leverage the planning and reasoning capabilities of LLMs. AirRAG designs an
efficient action space for the controllable reasoning generation. We also introduce Monte Carlo
Tree Search to expand the solution space. Meanwhile, by employing the tree-based search and selfconsistency verification, we explore potential reasoning paths and achieve comprehensive inference
computation scaling. In addition, computationally
optimal strategies are used to apply more computation to key actions, leading to further performance
improvements. Experimental results on diverse QA
datasets demonstrate the significant superiority of
AirRAG over other methods designed for complex
deep search scenarios.
Limitations
Although our model achieves competitive performance in various RAG tasks, there are some limitations that can be improved. The current optimal
computation allocation strategy is derived from sufficient experiments. We can consider designing an
automated policy model to implement the trade-off
between computational cost and performance. Despite great efforts in the inference scaling of RAG,
the experimental analysis may be limited due to the
massive computational cost of tree-based search
approaches. We will explore more complex reasoning tasks to verify the robustness and effectiveness
of our approach. In addition, the large search space
also brings more noise information, so we will further investigate the reward model or strategy to
explore a better reasoning path.

[TABLE page=9 index=1]
Columns: Lmax | Method | database_size | retrieval_time | retrieval_number | e2e
Row 1: Lmax: | Method: Vanilla RAG | database_size: 100w | retrieval_time: 0.9 | retrieval_number: 1.0 | e2e: 3.828
Row 2: Lmax: | Method: IterDRAG | database_size: 100w | retrieval_time: 1.833 | retrieval_number: 2.04 | e2e: 6.703
Row 3: Lmax: 8k | Method: | database_size: | retrieval_time: | retrieval_number: | e2e:
Row 4: Lmax: | Method: AirRAG-Lite | database_size: 100w | retrieval_time: 2.205 | retrieval_number: 2.25 | e2e: 8.482
Row 5: Lmax: | Method: AirRAG | database_size: 100w | retrieval_time: 3.453 | retrieval_number: 3.84 | e2e: 12.752
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=9 index=2]
Columns: tree-based search, we design computational opti- | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: approach to fully leverage the planning and reaRow 2: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: mization strategies for different actions to avoid | Unnamed: 0:
Row 3: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: soning capabilities of LLMs. AirRAG designs an
Row 4: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: redundant and inefficient expansions, as shown in | Unnamed: 0:
Row 5: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: efficient action space for the controllable reasonRow 6: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: Table 2. Furthermore, in Section 3.2.2, we propose | Unnamed: 0:
Row 7: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: ing generation. We also introduce Monte Carlo
Row 8: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: pruning strategies for state nodes and reasoning | Unnamed: 0:
Row 9: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: Tree Search to expand the solution space. MeanRow 10: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: paths. These optimizations significantly reduce in- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 11: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: while, by employing the tree-based search and selfRow 12: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: efficient LLM inference and repetitive path explo- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 13: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: consistency verification, we explore potential reaRow 14: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: ration. In practical applications, we can select ap- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 15: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: soning paths and achieve comprehensive inference
Row 16: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: propriate configuration parameters such as rollout, | Unnamed: 0:
Row 17: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: computation scaling. In addition, computationally
Row 18: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: n, and Lmax based on computational resource bud- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 19: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: optimal strategies are used to apply more computaRow 20: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: gets and time constraints, ensuring effectiveness | Unnamed: 0:
Row 21: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: tion to key actions, leading to further performance
Row 22: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: while achieving inference efficiency comparable to | Unnamed: 0:
Row 23: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: improvements. Experimental results on diverse QA
Row 24: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: current mainstream iterative RAG approaches. We | Unnamed: 0:
Row 25: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: datasets demonstrate the significant superiority of
Row 26: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: analyze the average inference efficiency per sample | Unnamed: 0:
Row 27: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: AirRAG over other methods designed for complex
Row 28: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: on the HotpotQA dataset in Table 3. By combining | Unnamed: 0:
Row 29: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: | Unnamed: 0: deep search scenarios.
Row 30: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: these results with those reported in Table 4 and Ta- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 31: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: ble 1, we are able to analyze the trade-offs between | Unnamed: 0:
Row 32: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: computational cost and performance. | Unnamed: 0: Limitations
Row 33: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: To make it easier to understand why our pro- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 34: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: posed AirRAG works, we present a qualitative | Unnamed: 0: Although our model achieves competitive perforRow 35: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: analysis in MuSiQue. Existing iterative methods | Unnamed: 0: mance in various RAG tasks, there are some limiRow 36: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: are often trapped in a single solution space when | Unnamed: 0: tations that can be improved. The current optimal
Row 37: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: confronted with complex tasks. As illustrated in | Unnamed: 0: computation allocation strategy is derived from sufRow 38: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: Figure 13, these iterative methods exhibit a key | Unnamed: 0: ficient experiments. We can consider designing an
Row 39: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: limitation that insufficient or ambiguous retrieval | Unnamed: 0: automated policy model to implement the trade-off
Row 40: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: context can lead to repetitive follow-up queries | Unnamed: 0: between computational cost and performance. DeRow 41: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: until it reaches the predefined maximum depth of | Unnamed: 0: spite great efforts in the inference scaling of RAG,
Row 42: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: iterations. This inefficient iteration results in high | Unnamed: 0: the experimental analysis may be limited due to the
Row 43: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: computational cost and incorrect answer. In con- | Unnamed: 0: massive computational cost of tree-based search
Row 44: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: trast, AirRAG designs efficient reasoning actions | Unnamed: 0: approaches. We will explore more complex reasonRow 45: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: to achieve autonomous planning and reasoning. As | Unnamed: 0: ing tasks to verify the robustness and effectiveness
Row 46: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: shown in Figure 14, the SAY action decomposes | Unnamed: 0: of our approach. In addition, the large search space
Row 47: tree-based search, we design computational opti-: the original query into a more rational sequence | Unnamed: 0: also brings more noise information, so we will fur-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 10]
References
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learning to
retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy
Liang. 2013. Semantic parsing on Freebase from
question-answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1533–1544, Seattle, Washington, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz
Lehmann, Michał Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski,
Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler. 2024. Graph of
Thoughts: Solving Elaborate Problems with Large
Language Models. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(16):17682–17690.
Guoxin Chen, Minpeng Liao, Chengxi Li, and Kai Fan.
2024. Alphamath almost zero: Process supervision
without process. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Mingyang Chen, Tianpeng Li, Haoze Sun, Yijie Zhou,
Chenzheng Zhu, Haofen Wang, Jeff Z. Pan, Wen
Zhang, Huajun Chen, Fan Yang, Zenan Zhou, and
Weipeng Chen. 2025. Research: Learning to reason with search for llms via reinforcement learning.
Preprint, arXiv:2503.19470.
Luyu Gao, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Jamie Callan.
2023. Precise zero-shot dense retrieval without relevance labels. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1762–1777,
Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri,
Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad AlDahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten,
Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, and et al. 2024. The llama
3 herd of models. Preprint, arXiv:2407.21783.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul
Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and
Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring mathematical
problem solving with the MATH dataset. In Thirtyfifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2).
Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara,
and Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a multihop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of
reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 6609–6625, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Paul I Jaffe, Russell A Poldrack, Robert J Schafer, and
Patrick G Bissett. 2023. Modelling human behaviour
in cognitive tasks with latent dynamical systems. Nature Human Behaviour, 7(6):986–1000.
Soyeong Jeong, Jinheon Baek, Sukmin Cho, Sung Ju
Hwang, and Jong Park. 2024. Adaptive-RAG: Learning to adapt retrieval-augmented large language models through question complexity. In Proceedings of
the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 7036–7050, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun,
Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie
Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Active retrieval
augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 7969–7992, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jiajie Jin, Yutao Zhu, Xinyu Yang, Chenghao Zhang,
and Zhicheng Dou. 2024. Flashrag: A modular
toolkit for efficient retrieval-augmented generation
research. CoRR, abs/2405.13576.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1601–1611, Vancouver,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nikhil Kandpal, Haikang Deng, Adam Roberts, Eric
Wallace, and Colin Raffel. 2023. Large language
models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge. In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 15696–15707.
PMLR.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick
Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and
Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for opendomain question answering. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 6769–6781,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. 2006. Bandit
based monte-carlo planning. In Machine Learning:
ECML 2006 , pages 282–293, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti,
Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones, Matthew
Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering
research. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:452–466.

[PAGE 11]
Xiaoxi Li, Guanting Dong, Jiajie Jin, Yuyao Zhang,
Yujia Zhou, Yutao Zhu, Peitian Zhang, and Zhicheng
Dou. 2025. Search-o1: Agentic search-enhanced
large reasoning models. Preprint, arXiv:2501.05366.
Xinbei Ma, Yeyun Gong, Pengcheng He, Hai Zhao,
and Nan Duan. 2023. Query rewriting in retrievalaugmented large language models. In Proceedings of
the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5303–5315, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das,
Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023.
When not to trust language models: Investigating
effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric memories. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9802–9822, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu,
Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse,
Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders,
Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen
Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin
Chess, and John Schulman. 2022. Webgpt: Browserassisted question-answering with human feedback.
Preprint, arXiv:2112.09332.
Zhenting Qi, Mingyuan Ma, Jiahang Xu, Li Lyna Zhang,
Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. 2024. Mutual reasoning makes smaller llms stronger problem-solvers.
Preprint, arXiv:2408.06195.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta
Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023.
Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves
to use tools. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems.
Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Minlie
Huang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. 2023. Enhancing retrieval-augmented large language models
with iterative retrieval-generation synergy. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 9248–9274, Singapore.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan
Scales, David Dohan, Ed H. Chi, Nathanael Schärli,
and Denny Zhou. 2023. Large language models can
be easily distracted by irrelevant context. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 31210–31227. PMLR.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc
Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore
Graepel, et al. 2017. Mastering chess and shogi by
self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. 2024. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
can be more effective than scaling model parameters.
Preprint, arXiv:2408.03314.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. MuSiQue: Multihop questions via single-hop question composition.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 10:539–554.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2023. Interleaving retrieval
with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledgeintensive multi-step questions. In Proceedings of
the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 10014–10037, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang,
Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. 2024. Multilingual e5 text embeddings: A technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.05672.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le,
Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency improves
chain of thought reasoning in language models. In
The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling.
2024. Corrective retrieval augmented generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15884.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui,
Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu,
Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang,
Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu,
Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng
Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng
Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan,
Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan
Qiu. 2024. Qwen2.5 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.15115.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio,
William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for
diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran,
Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik R
Narasimhan. 2023. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate
problem solving with large language models. In
Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.

[PAGE 12]
Tian Yu, Shaolei Zhang, and Yang Feng. 2024. Autorag: Autonomous retrieval-augmented generation for
large language models. Preprint, arXiv:2411.19443.
Zhenrui Yue, Honglei Zhuang, Aijun Bai, Kai Hui, Rolf
Jagerman, Hansi Zeng, Zhen Qin, Dong Wang, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. 2024. Inference
scaling for long-context retrieval augmented generation. Preprint, arXiv:2410.04343.
Di Zhang, Jianbo Wu, Jingdi Lei, Tong Che, Jiatong
Li, Tong Xie, Xiaoshui Huang, Shufei Zhang, Marco
Pavone, Yuqiang Li, Wanli Ouyang, and Dongzhan
Zhou. 2024. Llama-berry: Pairwise optimization
for o1-like olympiad-level mathematical reasoning.
Preprint, arXiv:2410.02884.
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Xinyun Chen,
Heng-Tze Cheng, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny
Zhou. 2024. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via
abstraction in large language models. In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai,
Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. 2025.
Deepresearcher: Scaling deep research via reinforcement learning in real-world environments. Preprint,
arXiv:2504.03160.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei,
Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H.
Chi. 2023. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models. In The
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations.

[PAGE 13]
A Implementation Details
For evaluation, we randomly select 1,000 samples
from the whole validation sets of each dataset as
our final test set, with a fixed random seed 0. To
better understand the complexity of multi-hop reasoning in these datasets, we analyze the hop distribution of the HotpotQA, MuSiQue, and 2WikiMultiHopQA test sets in Figure 5. The statistics
show that there is a high proportion of complex reasoning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,
50%, 25%). HotpotQA lacks explicit hop annotations, so we instead count the number of supporting
facts. MuSiQue has a significantly higher proportion of 3-hop and 4-hop queries compared to the
other datasets, indicating great reasoning complexity. This observation is further corroborated by our
experimental results in Table 1 and Figure 6. The
performance of our approach on MuSiQue is much
lower than those of the other two datasets.
In the retrieval process, we employ the
multilingual-e5-base (Wang et al., 2024) as the
retriever and use the widely used Wikipedia
dump from December 2018 as the retrieval corpus (Karpukhin et al., 2020) which comprises over
21 million passages. For generation, the default
sampling parameters top-p, top-k and temperature
are set to 0.8, 50 and 0.7 respectively. Evaluation metrics include Exact Match (EM), F1 score
(F1), and Accuracy (Acc), where accuracy indicates whether the ground truth is a substring of the
final generated answer. For reward model training,
we sample 8,000 question-answer pairs from each
dataset and generate more than 156,000 reasoning
paths using our proposed AirRAG (rollouts=32,
n=4, qdiv=1.0). In inference scaling experiments,
we sample maximum computation budgets Lmax
(e.g., 8k, 16k, 32k, 64k and 128k tokens). The
Lmax (maximum effective context length) denotes
the maximum number of input tokens across all
rollouts following (Yue et al., 2024). The predetermined maximum tree depth d is set to 10, specifically indicating that the SAY and SA actions are
executed once, while the RA-QT or QT-RA actions
have a maximum of 4 iterations.
To further substantiate our experimental approach, we present comprehensive details and rationales for the experimental design, including the
parameter configurations for the rollout process in
MCTS, the selection of the UCT function, reward
computation strategies, and the implementation of
baseline methods.
Rollout Setting for MCTS. In some experimental
configurations, we adopt a rollout setting of 1 for
MCTS. A rollout value of 1 does not imply that
MCTS is not executed, but rather that only one
complete simulation is performed at each decision
step to estimate the value of the current node. This
setting reduces computational cost and allows for
rapid generation of preliminary results, which is
especially beneficial in resource-constrained scenarios. Figure 4 presents the performance across
rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2
reports results obtained with a rollout value of 32.
Contribution of MCTS . MCTS primarily operates on actions such as QT, RA, and SA, as well as
parameters (e.g., n, topp, topk) within each action.
As illustrated in Figure 4 and Table 2, applying
MCTS with higher rollout values significantly improves performance compared to using a rollout
value of 1, and outperforms baselines such as IterDRAG and Search-o1.
UCT and Implicit Priors. We explore both UCT
and PUCT as potential search strategies for MCTS
and ultimately adopt UCT in our final implementation, owing to its simplicity and consistent empirical performance. Although UCT does not explicitly incorporate prior probabilities as in PUCT,
our framework implicitly introduces a form of policy prior through dependencies between actions,
which constrain action transitions. This implicit
prior serves a function analogous to the explicit
P (s, a) calculation in PUCT, guiding the search
toward high-quality actions based on prior reasoning steps. The complete action execution process
is detailed in Section 3.1.
Reward Computation and Backpropagation .
The reward score is determined by whether the
final correct answer is obtained. Specifically, after
executing action A5 (Summary-Answer), a reward
score is computed for each leaf node. In our experimental setup, we consider scenarios in which
the self-consistency sampling count is set to 1 or 3,
as summarized in Table 1 with nall = 1/3. When
nall = 1, the A5 action generates a single answer
and the leaf node is assigned a reward Q of 1. For
nall = 3, we apply the clustering method (e.g., jcdScore) described in Section 3.3 to calculate reward
scores for the three answer nodes. This method
assigns higher scores to answers with greater confidence, consistent with the voting strategies commonly employed in mathematical tasks. We then
use these computed scores to backpropagate and update the scores for all nodes along the search path.

[TABLE page=13 index=1]
Columns: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%, | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2
Row 1: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,: 50%, 25%). HotpotQA lacks explicit hop annota- | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2: reports results obtained with a rollout value of 32.
Row 2: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,: tions, so we instead count the number of supporting | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2: Contribution of MCTS. MCTS primarily operRow 3: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,: facts. MuSiQue has a significantly higher propor- | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2: ates on actions such as QT, RA, and SA, as well as
Row 4: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,: tion of 3-hop and 4-hop queries compared to the | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2: parameters (e.g., n, topp, topk) within each action.
Row 5: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,: other datasets, indicating great reasoning complex- | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2: As illustrated in Figure 4 and Table 2, applying
Row 6: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,: ity. This observation is further corroborated by our | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2: MCTS with higher rollout values significantly imRow 7: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,: experimental results in Table 1 and Figure 6. The | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2: proves performance compared to using a rollout
Row 8: soning queries with 3 hops or more (aboout 30%,: performance of our approach on MuSiQue is much | rollout values ranging from 1 to 32, while Table 2: value of 1, and outperforms baselines such as Iter-
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=13 index=2]
Columns: tionales for the experimental design, including the | assigns higher scores to answers with greater conRow 1: tionales for the experimental design, including the: parameter configurations for the rollout process in | assigns higher scores to answers with greater con-: fidence, consistent with the voting strategies comRow 2: tionales for the experimental design, including the: MCTS, the selection of the UCT function, reward | assigns higher scores to answers with greater con-: monly employed in mathematical tasks. We then
Row 3: tionales for the experimental design, including the: computation strategies, and the implementation of | assigns higher scores to answers with greater con-: use these computed scores to backpropagate and up-
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=13 index=3]
Columns: better understand the complexity of multi-hop rea- | step to estimate the value of the current node. This
Row 1: better understand the complexity of multi-hop rea-: soning in these datasets, we analyze the hop dis- | step to estimate the value of the current node. This: setting reduces computational cost and allows for
Row 2: better understand the complexity of multi-hop rea-: tribution of the HotpotQA, MuSiQue, and 2Wiki- | step to estimate the value of the current node. This: rapid generation of preliminary results, which is
Row 3: better understand the complexity of multi-hop rea-: MultiHopQA test sets in Figure 5. The statistics | step to estimate the value of the current node. This: especially beneficial in resource-constrained sce-
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 14]
In the formula Q(si, ai) = Q(si, ai) + Q(sd, ad),
Q(sd, ad) denotes the reward value associated with
the final answer.
Self-Consistency Baselines . For the Vanilla
RAG method, the improvement brought by selfconsistency voting is limited. In our main experiments, we set the rollout parameter to 1 to ensure
a fair comparison and to avoid potential confounding effects arising from applying self-consistency
solely to the final results.
Context Length Expansion for IterDRAG. For
IterDRAG, we follow the protocol outlined in the
original paper, modifying three key aspects: the
number of retrieved documents (ranging from 3 up
to 300 maximum), the number of contextual examples (fixed at5 in our experiments), and the number
of iterations (up to 5). Further details regarding
these inference scaling strategies are discussed in
the work by Google DeepMind (Yue et al., 2024).
B Additional Experiment Results
We evaluate the performance of AirRAG on various complex QA datasets. Table 4 compares its
accuracy and F1 with strong baselines under the
given inference computation budget, which is implemented based on Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct and one
million document database. The optimal performance exhibits consistent gains as Lmax expands,
which is termed as the inference scaling laws for
RAG (Yue et al., 2024). We integrate the remaining
methods for a given maximum computational budget into our approach, dubbed as AirRAG-Blender.
The best results are obtained by using only the SA
action to refine the final answer from all candidates,
as shown in Table 4. This also demonstrates the
flexibility of our approach architecture. In addition, to verify the robustness and generalization of
AirRAG, Table 5 shows the performance on more
diverse LLMs and datasets. For a fair comparison,
we utilize the widely used Wikipedia dump from
December 2018 (Karpukhin et al., 2020) as the
retrieval corpus. We observe consistent improvements over vanilla RAG and existing iterative methods (more than 10% on average). The significant
boost over IterDRAG and Auto-RAG suggests that
AirRAG explores more effective reasoning paths
through the human-like thinking paradigm and treebased search. Furthermore, we present detailed inference scaling results for each dataset individually,
as shown in Figure 6 and Figure 8.
C Prompt Examples
Given a user input query, our proposed AirRAG,
as shown in Figure 2, first attempts the direct answer (DA) action without prompts and performs
system analysis (SAY) using the prompt in Figure 9.
Subsequently, AirRAG performs retrieval and answer (RA) with the prompt in Figure 11, or query
transformation (QT) to generate refined queries for
better retrieval and answer. This process of RA-QT
or QT-RA can continuously iterate until no new
sub-queries arise or the maximum iteration depth is
reached. Finally, the summary answer (SA) in Figure 11 utilizes all the information and conclusions
from intermediate steps to refine the final answer.
D Case Study
To further illustrate our approach, we select a representative sample from the complex multi-hop
dataset MuSiQue for detailed analysis, as shown
in Figures 13 and 14. Figure 14 specifically visualizes a reasoning path generated by our method. The
SAY action can produce various expressions, and
the QT action may generate multiple query formulations, leading to a diverse set of reasoning nodes
and paths. This diversity enables our model to retrieve key information fragments that support both
intermediate steps and the final answer. Compared
with single-path generation under a fixed retrieval
environment, such multi-path exploration substantially increases the likelihood of identifying crucial
supporting evidence.

[PAGE 15]
Lmax Method HotpotQA MuSiQue 2Wiki Average
F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc
8k
ZeroShot QA 42.5 41.3 13.5 12.1 48.2 47.3 34.7 33.6
Vanilla RAG 70.3 65.4 23.0 17.7 55.8 53.4 49.7 45.5
IterDRAG∗ 74.3 69.1 26.7 19.4 60.5 57.6 53.8 48.7
AirRAG-Lite 80.6 75.4 35.4 28.9 75.3 73.1 63.8 59.1
AirRAG 79.6 75.2 41.0 35.0 76.0 74.2 65.6 61.5
AirRAG-Blender 81.1 79.8 41.6 36.4 82.2 81.7 68.3 66.0
32k
Vanilla RAG 77.1 72.0 29.0 22.9 60.9 58.1 55.7 51.0
IterDRAG∗ 77.7 71.6 30.8 22.3 63.0 60.2 57.1 51.4
AirRAG-Lite 82.4 76.9 36.7 30.1 78.8 76.8 66.0 61.3
AirRAG 82.5 77.4 43.2 36.3 80.4 78.9 68.7 64.2
AirRAG-Blender 82.9 80.6 43.3 37.6 83.4 83.0 69.9 67.1
128k
IterDRAG∗ 76.8 71.0 31.7 24.8 65.5 62.4 58.0 52.7
AirRAG-Lite 82.5 77.1 35.7 30.4 78.3 76.0 65.5 62.2
AirRAG 83.3 78.0 43.5 36.5 82.3 80.5 69.7 65.0
AirRAG-Blender 83.7 81.4 43.9 38.5 84.4 84.2 70.6 68.0
Table 4: Overall evaluation results under different computational resource budgets, whereQwen2.5-14B-Instruct
is used as the generator LLM. * indicates the results reproduced by us. Lmax denotes the maximum number of
input tokens across all rollouts. The best results for each Lmax are in bold. The number of both rollouts and output
sequences is set to 1 for our proposed AirRAG methods.
Method NQ TriviaQA PopQA WebQA HotpotQA 2Wiki
EM EM F1 EM F1 F1
Vanilla RAG 35.1 58.8 36.7 15.7 35.3 21.0
Self-RAG 36.4 38.2 32.7 21.9 29.6 25.1
Iter-RetGen 36.8 60.1 37.9 18.2 38.3 21.6
Auto-RAG 37.9 60.9 47.8 25.1 44.9 48.9
AirRAG 53.6 63.2 51.8 52.6 67.6 66.3
Table 5: Performance comparison on six benchmarks, where Llama3-8B-Instruct is used as the generator LLM.
Partial experimental results are quoted from Jin et al. (2024) and Yu et al. (2024). The best results are in bold. The
number of both rollouts and output sequences is set to 1. The number of documents for a single retrieval is set to 5.
Our proposed AirRAG significantly outperform the others.

[TABLE page=15 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | HotpotQA | MuSiQue | 2Wiki | Average
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Lmax | Unnamed: 1: Method | HotpotQA: | MuSiQue: | 2Wiki: | Average:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | HotpotQA: F1 Acc | MuSiQue: F1 Acc | 2Wiki: F1 Acc | Average: F1 Acc
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ZeroShot QA | HotpotQA: 42.5 41.3 | MuSiQue: 13.5 12.1 | 2Wiki: 48.2 47.3 | Average: 34.7 33.6
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Vanilla RAG | HotpotQA: 70.3 65.4 | MuSiQue: 23.0 17.7 | 2Wiki: 55.8 53.4 | Average: 49.7 45.5
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: 8k | Unnamed: 1: IterDRAG∗ | HotpotQA: 74.3 69.1 | MuSiQue: 26.7 19.4 | 2Wiki: 60.5 57.6 | Average: 53.8 48.7
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG-Lite | HotpotQA: 80.6 75.4 | MuSiQue: 35.4 28.9 | 2Wiki: 75.3 73.1 | Average: 63.8 59.1
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG | HotpotQA: 79.6 75.2 | MuSiQue: 41.0 35.0 | 2Wiki: 76.0 74.2 | Average: 65.6 61.5
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG-Blender | HotpotQA: 81.1 79.8 | MuSiQue: 41.6 36.4 | 2Wiki: 82.2 81.7 | Average: 68.3 66.0
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Vanilla RAG | HotpotQA: 77.1 72.0 | MuSiQue: 29.0 22.9 | 2Wiki: 60.9 58.1 | Average: 55.7 51.0
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: IterDRAG∗ | HotpotQA: 77.7 71.6 | MuSiQue: 30.8 22.3 | 2Wiki: 63.0 60.2 | Average: 57.1 51.4
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: 32k | Unnamed: 1: | HotpotQA: | MuSiQue: | 2Wiki: | Average:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG-Lite | HotpotQA: 82.4 76.9 | MuSiQue: 36.7 30.1 | 2Wiki: 78.8 76.8 | Average: 66.0 61.3
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG | HotpotQA: 82.5 77.4 | MuSiQue: 43.2 36.3 | 2Wiki: 80.4 78.9 | Average: 68.7 64.2
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG-Blender | HotpotQA: 82.9 80.6 | MuSiQue: 43.3 37.6 | 2Wiki: 83.4 83.0 | Average: 69.9 67.1
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: IterDRAG∗ | HotpotQA: 76.8 71.0 | MuSiQue: 31.7 24.8 | 2Wiki: 65.5 62.4 | Average: 58.0 52.7
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: 128k | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG-Lite | HotpotQA: 82.5 77.1 | MuSiQue: 35.7 30.4 | 2Wiki: 78.3 76.0 | Average: 65.5 62.2
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG | HotpotQA: 83.3 78.0 | MuSiQue: 43.5 36.5 | 2Wiki: 82.3 80.5 | Average: 69.7 65.0
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: AirRAG-Blender | HotpotQA: 83.7 81.4 | MuSiQue: 43.9 38.5 | 2Wiki: 84.4 84.2 | Average: 70.6 68.0
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=15 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | NQ | TriviaQA | PopQA | WebQA | HotpotQA | 2Wiki
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Method | NQ: | TriviaQA: | PopQA: | WebQA: | HotpotQA: | 2Wiki:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | NQ: EM | TriviaQA: EM | PopQA: F1 | WebQA: EM | HotpotQA: F1 | 2Wiki: F1
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: Vanilla RAG | NQ: 35.1 | TriviaQA: 58.8 | PopQA: 36.7 | WebQA: 15.7 | HotpotQA: 35.3 | 2Wiki: 21.0
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Self-RAG | NQ: 36.4 | TriviaQA: 38.2 | PopQA: 32.7 | WebQA: 21.9 | HotpotQA: 29.6 | 2Wiki: 25.1
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: Iter-RetGen | NQ: 36.8 | TriviaQA: 60.1 | PopQA: 37.9 | WebQA: 18.2 | HotpotQA: 38.3 | 2Wiki: 21.6
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: Auto-RAG | NQ: 37.9 | TriviaQA: 60.9 | PopQA: 47.8 | WebQA: 25.1 | HotpotQA: 44.9 | 2Wiki: 48.9
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: AirRAG | NQ: 53.6 | TriviaQA: 63.2 | PopQA: 51.8 | WebQA: 52.6 | HotpotQA: 67.6 | 2Wiki: 66.3
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 16]
2 facts
70.7%
3 facts
21.2%
4 facts
6.5%
>=5 facts
1.6%
HotpotQA
2 hops51.2%
3 hops
30.9%
4 hops
17.9%
MuSiQue
2 hops
76.7%
3 hops 0.6%
4 hops
22.1%
>=5 hops
0.6%
2WikiMultiHopQA
Figure 5: Overview of the distribution of query complexity over three multi-hop QA datasets.
5 10 20 30 40 50
81Accuracy
5 10 20 30 40 50
96Recall
816 32 64 128
80Accuracy
816 32 64 128
94Recall
AirRAG
AirRAG-Lite
IterDRAG
HotpotQA
Number of Documents Effective Context Length (k)
5 10 20 30 40 50
40Accuracy
5 10 20 30 40 50
72Recall
816 32 64 128
40Accuracy
816 32 64 128
72Recall
AirRAG
AirRAG-Lite
IterDRAG
MuSiQue
Number of Documents Effective Context Length (k)
5 10 20 30 40 50
85Accuracy
5 10 20 30 40 50
102Recall
816 32 64 128
85Accuracy
816 32 64 128
98Recall
AirRAG
AirRAG-Lite
IterDRAG
2WikiMultihopQA
Number of Documents Effective Context Length (k)
Figure 6: Impact of the retrieved document number scaling and the maximum context length scaling over three
datasets.

[TABLE page=16 index=1]
Columns: 81 | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | 96 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | Unnamed: 6 | Unnamed: 7 | 80 | Unnamed: 8 | Unnamed: 9 | 94 | Unnamed: 10 | Unnamed: 11 | Unnamed: 12
Row 1: 81: 78 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 92 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 78 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 92 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 2: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 90 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 3: 81: 75 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 88 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 76 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 88 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 4: 81: 72 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 84 Recall | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: R7e4 call | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 8R6ecall | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 5: 81: 69 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 80 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 72 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 84 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: AirRAG
Row 6: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 82 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: AirRAG-Li
Row 7: 81: 66 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 76 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 70 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 80 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: IterDRAG
Row 8: 81: 63 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 72 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 68 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 78 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 9: 81: 5 10 | Unnamed: 0: 20.0 | Unnamed: 1: 30.0 | Unnamed: 2: 40 | Unnamed: 3: 50.0 | 96: 5 10 | Unnamed: 4: 20.0 | Unnamed: 5: 30.0 | Unnamed: 6: 40 | Unnamed: 7: 50 | 80: 816 32 | Unnamed: 8: 64.0 | Unnamed: 9: 128 | 94: 816 32 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: 64.0 | Unnamed: 12:
Row 10: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: Number of Documents | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: Effective Context Length (k) | 94: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 11: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: MuSiQue | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 12: 81: 40 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 72 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 40 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 72 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 13: 81: 36 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 66 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 36 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 68 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 14: 81: 6432 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 60 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 32 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 15: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 60 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 16: 81: 28 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 54 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 28 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 17: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 56 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 18: 81: 24 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 48 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 24 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 19: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 52 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: AirRAG
Row 20: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: AirRAG-Li
Row 21: 81: 20 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 42 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 20 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 48 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12: IterDRAG
Row 22: 81: 16 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 36 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 16 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 44 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 23: 81: 5 10 | Unnamed: 0: 20.0 | Unnamed: 1: 30.0 | Unnamed: 2: 40 | Unnamed: 3: 50.0 | 96: 5 10 | Unnamed: 4: 20.0 | Unnamed: 5: 30.0 | Unnamed: 6: 40 | Unnamed: 7: 50 | 80: 816 32 | Unnamed: 8: 64.0 | Unnamed: 9: 128 | 94: 816 32 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: 64.0 | Unnamed: 12:
Row 24: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: Number of Documents | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: Effective Context Length (k) | 94: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 25: 81: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: 2WikiMultihopQA | Unnamed: 7: | 80: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 26: 81: 85 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 102 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 85 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 98 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
Row 27: 81: 80 | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | 96: 96 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | 80: 80 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | 94: 91 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Unnamed: 12:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 17]
1 2 3 4 5
65Accuracy
Retrieve 3 Documents
QwenRM
SA
SC-emb
SC-jcd
Average
1 2 3 4 5
Retrieve 8k Context Length
QwenRM
SA
SC-emb
SC-jcd
Average
Number of Output Sequences
Figure 7: Performance comparison of different verification methods. "QwenRM" is short for reward model trained
on the Qwen model. "SA" is the reasoning action of summary and answer. "SC-emb/jcd" are two self-consistency
verification methods based on text embeddings and jaccard similarity. "Average" is the average score over all
candidate rollouts. The single retrieval process is set to retrieve three documents or fixed 8k context.
1 2 4 8 16 32
Number of rollouts
82Accuracy
HotpotQA
1 2 4 8 16 32
Number of rollouts
MuSiQue
1 2 4 8 16 32
Number of rollouts
2WikiMultihopQA
1.0
1.9
3.3
4.8
6.7
8.6
Accuracy
Valid rollouts
1.0
2.0
3.5
4.9
6.4
8.1
Accuracy
Valid rollouts
1.0
1.9
3.2
4.6
6.9
10.9
Accuracy
Valid rollouts
Figure 8: Performance comparison on the number of different effective rollouts over three datasets. Sampling more
diverse reasoning paths consistently improves accuracy.
Example prompt for SAY reasoning action
Given the user query, you may rephrase it for better clarity, summarize it at a higher level,
or decompose it into multiple sub-queries to facilitate more effective information retrieval and
response generation. If no modification is necessary, return "None". Otherwise, list sub-queries,
each on a new line.
<Here are some examples.>
Query: {question}
Output:
Figure 9: Example prompt for SAY reasoning action.

[TABLE page=17 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | QwenRM | Unnamed: 1 | QwenRM.1
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: 65.0 | QwenRM: | Unnamed: 1: | QwenRM.1:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | QwenRM: SA | Unnamed: 1: 71.0 | QwenRM.1: SA
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: 64.0 | QwenRM: SC-emb | Unnamed: 1: 70.0 | QwenRM.1: SC-emb
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: 63.0 | QwenRM: SC-jcd | Unnamed: 1: | QwenRM.1: SC-jcd
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | QwenRM: Average | Unnamed: 1: 69.0 | QwenRM.1: Average
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=17 index=2]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Accuracy | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Accuracy.1 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | Unnamed: 6 | Accuracy.2 | Unnamed: 7 | Unnamed: 8
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 10.0 | Unnamed: 3: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: 10.0 | Unnamed: 6: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: 12.0
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: Valid rollouts | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Accuracy.1: Valid rollouts | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: | Accuracy.2: Valid rollouts | Unnamed: 7: 10.9 | Unnamed: 8:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: 80.0 | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: 8.6 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 36.0 | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 4: 8.1 | Unnamed: 5: | Unnamed: 6: 76.0 | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: 10.0
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=17 index=3]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Accuracy | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Unnamed: 3 | Unnamed: 4 | Unnamed: 5 | Accuracy.1 | Unnamed: 6 | Unnamed: 7 | Unnamed: 8 | Unnamed: 9 | Unnamed: 10 | Unnamed: 11 | Accuracy.2 | Unnamed: 12 | Unnamed: 13 | Unnamed: 14 | Unnamed: 15
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 10.0 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: 10.0 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: 1.0
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: Valid rollouts | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: Valid rollouts | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: Valid rollouts | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: 10.9 | Unnamed: 15:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: 80.0 | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: 8.6 | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: 36.0 | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: 8.1 | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: 76.0 | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: 1.0
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 8.0 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: 8.0 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: 6.7 | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: 74.0 | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: 78.0 | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: 34.0 | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: 6.4 | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: 8.0
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 6.0 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: 6.0 | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: 6.9 | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: 4.8 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: 4.9 | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: 72.0 | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: 6.0
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: 76.0 | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: 32.0 | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: 4.6 | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: 3.3 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 4.0 | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: 3.5 | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: 4.0 | Unnamed: 10: 70.0 | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Accuracy: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: | Unnamed: 4: | Unnamed: 5: | Accuracy.1: | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: | Unnamed: 10: | Unnamed: 11: | Accuracy.2: 3.2 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15: 4.0
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: 74.0 | Accuracy: 1.9 21.0 | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Unnamed: 3: 2.0 | Unnamed: 4: 30.0 | Unnamed: 5: 1.0 | Accuracy.1: 2.0 | Unnamed: 6: | Unnamed: 7: | Unnamed: 8: | Unnamed: 9: 2.0 | Unnamed: 10: 68.0 | Unnamed: 11: 1.0 | Accuracy.2: 1.9 | Unnamed: 12: | Unnamed: 13: | Unnamed: 14: | Unnamed: 15:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 18]
Example prompt for QT reasoning action
Given the context provided, please determine whether rephrasing, summarization, or decomposition
into sub-queries is necessary to enhance the accuracy and efficiency of information retrieval and
response generation. If no modification is required, return "None". Subsequent queries should be
listed individually.
<Here are some examples.>
Main Query: {question}
History: {history}
This Query: {this_question}
Figure 10: Example prompt for QT reasoning action.
Example Prompt for RA actions
You are an expert in question answering. I am going to give you some contexts with may or may
not be relevant to the question. Answer the question according to the contexts.
{contexts}
Question: {question}
Figure 11: Example Prompt for RA actions.
Example prompt for SA reasoning action
You are an expert in question answering. Given the context, sub-queries and responses, output a
correct and concise answer to User Query.
<Here are some examples.>
User Query: {question}
{history}
Contexts: {contexts}
Final Answer:
Figure 12: Example prompt for SA reasoning action.

[PAGE 19]
The iterative methods often traps in a solution space
Context: <Retrieved documents>
Question: What is the mouth of watercourse for the body of water where Bartram’s Covered Bridge is located?
Follow up: Which body of water is Bartram’s Covered Bridge located on?
Follow up: | Intermediate answer: | So the final answer is:
Output: Follow up: Which body of water is Bartram’s Covered Bridge located on?
(Note: The context does not specify which body of water Bartram’s Covered Bridge is located on, but it does mention
that the bridge carries Goshen Road over Crum Creek. Therefore, we need to confirm that Crum Creek is the body
of water in question before proceeding to find the mouth of the watercourse.)
· · ·
· · · (It enters an endless cycle of iteration until it reaches predefined maximum depth.)
Gold Answer: Delaware River
Process Annotation: Q1: Bartram’s Covered Bridge » crosses
A1: Crum Creek
Q2: Q1 » mouth of the watercourse
A2: Delaware River
The iterative self-exploration often traps in a solution space with low-quality reasoning steps even
after many attempts.
Figure 13: Incorrect reasoning path of iterative RAG methods. Ambiguity or missing information in the intermediate
steps leads in duplicate sub-query.

[PAGE 20]
The simple and effective action space of AirRAG leads to the correct reasoning trajectory
Question: What is the mouth of watercourse for the body of water where Bartram’s Covered Bridge is located?
Action1: SAY
Input: What is the mouth of watercourse for the body of water where Bartram’s Covered Bridge is located?
Output: Where is Bartram’s Covered Bridge located?
What is the mouth of the watercourse for the body of water near Bartram’s Covered Bridge?
Action2: RA
Input: <Retrieved documents> Where is Bartram’s Covered Bridge located?
Output: Bartram’s Covered Bridge is located on the border between Delaware County and Chester County, Pennsylvania,
carrying Goshen Road over Crum Creek.
Action3: QT
Input: What is the mouth of the watercourse for the body of water near Bartram’s Covered Bridge?
Output: What is the mouth of Crum Creek?
Action4: RA
Input: <Retrieved documents> What is the mouth of Crum Creek?
Output: Based on the provided contexts, there are two different locations referred to as Crum Creek, and they flow into
different bodies of water:
1. The Crum Creek in Delaware County and Chester County, Pennsylvania, flows into the Delaware River in Eddystone,
Pennsylvania.
2. The Crum Creek (also called Cathatachua Creek) in East Creek, New York, flows into the Mohawk River.
Since the question does not specify which Crum Creek is being referred to, both answers are possible. However, if
we consider the first context as the primary reference, the mouth of Crum Creek is the Delaware River in Eddystone,
Pennsylvania.
Action5: SA
Input: <Retrieved documents> <Sub-queries with answers>
Output: The mouth of the watercourse for the body of water where Bartram’s Covered Bridge is located,Crum Creek,
is the Delaware River in Eddystone, Pennsylvania.
Gold Answer: Delaware River.
AirRAG obtains the correct answer by performing five reasoning actions efficiently.
Figure 14: Effective reasoning rollout of AirRAG. The fundamental action space and tree-based search provides
greater compatibility and flexibility, which avoids being trapped in a single solution space by a low-quality
intermediate step for chain-like reasoning paradigm.