[PAGE 1]
QExplorer: Large Language Model Based Query Extraction for
Toxic Content Exploration
Shaola Ren
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
shaola.rs@alibaba-inc.com
Li Ke
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
keli.kl@alibaba-inc.com
Longtao Huang
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
kaiyang.hlt@alibaba-inc.com
Dehong Gao
Northwestern Polytechnical
University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
dehong.gdh@nwpu.edu.cn
Hui Xue
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
hui.xueh@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in information retrieval, especially in toxic content exploration, as such
content is likely to be disguised. With the recent achievements
in generative Large Language Model (LLM), we are able to leverage the capabilities of LLMs to extract effective queries for similar
content exploration directly. This study proposes QExplorer, an
approach of large language model based Query Extraction for toxic
content Exploration. The QExplorer approach involves a 2-stage
training process: instruction Supervised FineTuning (SFT) and preference alignment using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), as
well as the datasets construction with feedback of search system.
To verify the effectiveness of QExplorer, a series of offline and
online experiments are conducted on our real-world system. The
offline empirical results demonstrate that the performance of our
automatic query extraction outperforms that of several LLMs and
humans. The online deployment shows a significant increase in the
detection of toxic items.
CCS Concepts
• Information systems → Information retrieval; • Computing
methodologies → Machine learning; Artificial intelligence.
Keywords
query extraction, large language models, supervised fine-tuning
1 Introduction
The content on widely used social media or e-commerce platforms,
such as Twitter, Amazon and Taobao, is created by millions of users.
It is inevitable that a small portion of toxic content such as offensive,
sexual, violent, and fraudulent language will appear. Therefore, the
detection and exploration of such toxic content become important
for maintaining a healthy platform. This toxic content can appear
in the form of text, image, audio, or video. This study focuses on the
item’s textual information of Xianyu which is the largest Chinese
second-hand trading platform.
To recognize toxic content, a general solution is to train classification models to process all the information that is concerned.
However, these models cannot identify all toxic items. Figure 1
illustrates the framework of our toxic content detection system,
which contains strategies, classification models, a risk understanding module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items
overlooked by these models are reported by the users of the trading platform. We aim to explore all the similar toxic content when
such reports occur. Since toxic content is often camouflaged within
normal language expressions, we incorporate a risk understanding
module before the search process, as shown in Figure 1. The risk
understanding module essentially generates queries based on the
reported toxic content. Prior to the implementation detailed in this
work, only manually annotated queries were used for exploration.
Figure 1: Framework of the toxic content detection system.
This system is composed by strategies, classification models,
a risk understanding module and a search system. Some suspicious toxic items missed by the strategies and classification
models are reported by users of the trading platform. Then
the auditors analyze the content and perform multi-modal
query searches. The dashed box indicates the auditor risk
understanding module, which is the focus of this study.
When a suspicious toxic content is reported, the auditor first
analyzes the content and extracts keywords or images that need to
be explored. The queries are then used to search within a search
system comprised of two phases: retrieval and ranking. During
the retrieval phase, methods such as inverted index based exact
keyword matching, embedding based semantic retrieval, and graph
based retrieval are employed. Generally speaking, the inverted
index based keyword exact matching is the most effective method
for toxic content exploration. In the ranking phase, all retrieved
arXiv:2502.18480v1 [cs.IR] 6 Feb 2025

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor- | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items
Row 1: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: mation retrieval, especially in toxic content exploration, as such | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: overlooked by these models are reported by the users of the tradRow 2: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: content is likely to be disguised. With the recent achievements | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: ing platform. We aim to explore all the similar toxic content when
Row 3: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: in generative Large Language Model (LLM), we are able to lever- | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: such reports occur. Since toxic content is often camouflaged within
Row 4: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: age the capabilities of LLMs to extract effective queries for similar | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: normal language expressions, we incorporate a risk understanding
Row 5: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: content exploration directly. This study proposes QExplorer, an | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: module before the search process, as shown in Figure 1. The risk
Row 6: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: approach of large language model based Query Extraction for toxic | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: understanding module essentially generates queries based on the
Row 7: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: content Exploration. The QExplorer approach involves a 2-stage | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: reported toxic content. Prior to the implementation detailed in this
Row 8: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: training process: instruction Supervised FineTuning (SFT) and pref- | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: work, only manually annotated queries were used for exploration.
Row 9: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: erence alignment using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), as | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 10: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: well as the datasets construction with feedback of search system. | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 11: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: To verify the effectiveness of QExplorer, a series of offline and | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 12: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: online experiments are conducted on our real-world system. The | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 13: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: offline empirical results demonstrate that the performance of our | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 14: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: automatic query extraction outperforms that of several LLMs and | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 15: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: humans. The online deployment shows a significant increase in the | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 16: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: detection of toxic items. | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 17: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: CCS Concepts | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 18: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: • Information systems→ Information retrieval; • Computing | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 19: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: methodologies→Machine learning; Artificial intelligence. | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 20: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: Figure 1: Framework of the toxic content detection system.
Row 21: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: Keywords | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 22: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: This system is composed by strategies, classification models,
Row 23: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: query extraction, large language models, supervised fine-tuning | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: a risk understanding module and a search system. Some susRow 24: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: picious toxic itemsmissed by the strategies and classification
Row 25: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: 1 Introduction | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: models are reported by users of the trading platform. Then
Row 26: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: The content on widely used social media or e-commerce platforms, | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: the auditors analyze the content and perform multi-modal
Row 27: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: such as Twitter, Amazon and Taobao, is created by millions of users. | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: query searches. The dashed box indicates the auditor risk
Row 28: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: It is inevitable that a small portion of toxic content such as offensive, | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: understanding module, which is the focus of this study.
Row 29: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: sexual, violent, and fraudulent language will appear. Therefore, the | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items:
Row 30: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: detection and exploration of such toxic content become important | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: When a suspicious toxic content is reported, the auditor first
Row 31: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: for maintaining a healthy platform. This toxic content can appear | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: analyzes the content and extracts keywords or images that need to
Row 32: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: in the form of text, image, audio, or video. This study focuses on the | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: be explored. The queries are then used to search within a search
Row 33: Automatically extracting effective queries is challenging in infor-: item’s textual information of Xianyu which is the largest Chinese | ing module, and a search system. In our case, some toxic items: system comprised of two phases: retrieval and ranking. During
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia S Ren et al.
Table 1: Typical toxic content is presented, with the improper
segments annotated by humans in the given context. These
segments are italicized or highlighted in red.
国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduction Printing of Diplomas for Domestic or International Universities
Ranked by QS)
营业性演出许可(满2年)+广播节目电视制作(满2年) 可以转让可
以迁入所有城市 (Transferable Commercial Performance License (2+
Years) and Radio/TV Program Production License (2+ Years), Eligible
for Relocation to Any City)
我约您］坐标上海/杭州，本人男单主，周末节假日，约JK或
常服。主要活动吃饭逛街看电影等，希望能主打一个陪伴及
情侣感。全程接送一切费用免单。具体收费你开价，只要不
太过分都能接受[吉他] (Personal Companion Offer: Male host in
Shanghai/Hangzhou for weekends and holidays. Seek company
for JK or regular wear. Activities include dining, shopping, and
movies with a focus on companionship and a romantic relationship.
Round-trip transport and all expenses covered. Rates are negotiable,
as long as the demands are not too excessive. [Guitar])
items are ranked according to their risk probabilities, which are
calculated by the ranking service.
In this toxic content exploration system shown in Figure 1, the
auditor risk understanding component serves as the foundation
of the entire process. An effective query can result in an efficient
toxic content exploration by identifying most of the similar toxic
items in the search system. Our auditors are asked to mark out
the part related to risk. However, an effective query does not always focus solely on hazardous parts of the content; sometimes
specific language patterns are also helpful for exploration, as different expressions with similar meanings are often employed. Table
1 shows some typical examples, with italicized or highlighted in
red parts indicating the human annotated phrases that are deemed
improper or suspicious according to the auditors’ judgment. Those
annotated phrases are then used for exploring similar toxic content. As observed, not all the annotated phrases are suitable for an
efficient search. For example, the phrase “Transferable Commercial
Performance License (2+ Years) and Radio/TV Program Production
License” is overly verbose and may not yield any results in a search
system. Meanwhile, the term “companionship” is too broad and
may result in too many irrelevant items.
Assistance from models can alleviate the psychological burden
on auditors who have been exposed to negative content for a long
period. To reduce human dependence in the risk understanding
phase and enhance the efficiency in toxic content exploration, we
introduce the following LLM based automatic query extraction
approach.
Generally, existing methods for keyphrase extracting can be
divided into three categories: (1) 2-step keyphrase extraction ([4, 10,
20, 32]) which involves generating a set of phrase candidates using
various methods and subsequently ranking or classifying these
candidates. (2) Sequence labeling ([ 1, 9, 19, 31]) which predicts
the likelihood that a token should be included in the extracted
keyphrase. (3) Sequence-to-sequence generation ([5, 18, 28]) which
is based on pretrained models such as Bert, Bart or T5.
The way humans work is fundamentally different from the first
two methods. An experienced content safety expert typically has
an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for
further exploration. This is the intuition of our proposed method.
Recent achievements in LLMs demonstrate their capability to
comprehend natural language text and address even more complex
real world scenarios. Proprietary LLMs like GPT3.5 or GPT4 have
shown impressive performance in query extraction when assisted
by carefully crafted prompts. This encourages us to leverage LLMs
for query extraction. Furthermore, the availability of open-source
LLMs, such as the series of Llama ([25, 26]), ChatGLM ([7, 8]), Qwen
([2, 30]), allows us to conduct this study in a practical manner. When
given a piece of toxic content, the useful parts for exploration may
appear in various forms, such as phrases, fragments of sentences,
emojis, or prompts. We expect that a finetuned LLM can directly
identify and extract these components.
In this study, we propose an approach of LLM based query extraction aimed at toxic content exploration (QExplorer), which can
compete with humans in exploration efficiency. It can be classified
as a sequence-to-sequence generation method but differs in design
from previous methods. The QExplorer involves a 2-stage training
process: instruction Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and preference
alignment using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). Feedback
of the search system is used to construct preference data. The model
training objective is aligned with the goal of making the extracted
queries useful for toxic content exploration.
The contributions of this work are in the following aspects:
(1) We formulate the query extraction as a 2-stage LLM alignment problem innovatively. The preference alignment enables further adaptation of the query extraction model, achieving improved performance when using Qwen1.5-7B-Chat
and ChatGLM3-6B as base models.
(2) We propose a finetuning framework named QExplorer for
query extraction aimed at toxic content exploration. This
framework seeks to extract more effective queries to look for
toxic items in search system by integrating feedback from
the search system into the training process.
(3) Offline experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms baseline models and humans in extracting effective
queries. The Online deployment shows a significant increase
in toxic items detection.
2 Related Works
2.1 Keyphrase Extraction
Keyphrase extraction approaches can be broadly categorized into
three main types. Early work in this area follows a pipeline approach, often employing a 2-step method ([4, 10, 20, 32]). Initially,
a set of candidate phrases is generated using heuristics, part-ofspeech tags, n-grams, or other techniques. Subsequently, a ranking
model is trained to order the candidates, with the top n phrases
being selected as the extracted keyphrases. Sequence labeling, a
technique widely used in Named Entity Recognition (NER) ([3, 16]),
has been adapted for keyphrase extraction over the past decade
([1, 9, 19, 31]). In sequence labeling training, designed labels are

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc- | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for
Row 1: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: tion Printing of Diplomas for Domestic or International Universities | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: further exploration. This is the intuition of our proposed method.
Row 2: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: Ranked by QS) | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: Recent achievements in LLMs demonstrate their capability to
Row 3: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: comprehend natural language text and address even more complex
Row 4: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: 营业性演出许可(满2年)+广播节目电视制作(满2年)可以转让可 | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for:
Row 5: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: real world scenarios. Proprietary LLMs like GPT3.5 or GPT4 have
Row 6: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: 以迁入所有城市 (Transferable Commercial Performance License (2+ | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for:
Row 7: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: shown impressive performance in query extraction when assisted
Row 8: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: Years) and Radio/TV Program Production License (2+ Years), Eligible | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for:
Row 9: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: by carefully crafted prompts. This encourages us to leverage LLMs
Row 10: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: for Relocation to Any City) | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for:
Row 11: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: for query extraction. Furthermore, the availability of open-source
Row 12: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: 我约您]坐标上海/杭州,本人男单主,周末节假日,约JK或 | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: LLMs, such as the series of Llama ([25, 26]), ChatGLM ([7, 8]), Qwen
Row 13: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: 常服。主要活动吃饭逛街看电影等,希望能主打一个陪伴及 | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: ([2, 30]), allows us to conduct this study in a practical manner.When
Row 14: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: 情侣感。全程接送一切费用免单。具体收费你开价,只要不 | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: given a piece of toxic content, the useful parts for exploration may
Row 15: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: 太过分都能接受[吉他] (Personal Companion Offer: Male host in | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: appear in various forms, such as phrases, fragments of sentences,
Row 16: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: Shanghai/Hangzhou for weekends and holidays. Seek company | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: emojis, or prompts. We expect that a finetuned LLM can directly
Row 17: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: for JK or regular wear. Activities include dining, shopping, and | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: identify and extract these components.
Row 18: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: movies with a focus on companionship and a romantic relationship. | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: In this study, we propose an approach of LLM based query exRow 19: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: Round-trip transport and all expenses covered. Rates are negotiable, | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: traction aimed at toxic content exploration (QExplorer), which can
Row 20: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: as long as the demands are not too excessive. [Guitar]) | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: compete with humans in exploration efficiency. It can be classified
Row 21: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: as a sequence-to-sequence generation method but differs in design
Row 22: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: from previous methods. The QExplorer involves a 2-stage training
Row 23: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: process: instruction Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and preference
Row 24: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: items are ranked according to their risk probabilities, which are | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: alignment using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). Feedback
Row 25: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: calculated by the ranking service. | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: of the search system is used to construct preference data. The model
Row 26: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: In this toxic content exploration system shown in Figure 1, the | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: training objective is aligned with the goal of making the extracted
Row 27: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: auditor risk understanding component serves as the foundation | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: queries useful for toxic content exploration.
Row 28: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: of the entire process. An effective query can result in an efficient | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: The contributions of this work are in the following aspects:
Row 29: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: toxic content exploration by identifying most of the similar toxic | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: (1) We formulate the query extraction as a 2-stage LLM alignRow 30: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: items in the search system. Our auditors are asked to mark out | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: ment problem innovatively. The preference alignment enRow 31: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: the part related to risk. However, an effective query does not al- | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: ables further adaptation of the query extractionmodel, achievRow 32: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: ways focus solely on hazardous parts of the content; sometimes | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: ing improved performance when using Qwen1.5-7B-Chat
Row 33: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: specific language patterns are also helpful for exploration, as differ- | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: and ChatGLM3-6B as base models.
Row 34: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: ent expressions with similar meanings are often employed. Table | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: (2) We propose a finetuning framework named QExplorer for
Row 35: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: 1 shows some typical examples, with italicized or highlighted in | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: query extraction aimed at toxic content exploration. This
Row 36: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: red parts indicating the human annotated phrases that are deemed | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: framework seeks to extract more effective queries to look for
Row 37: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: improper or suspicious according to the auditors’ judgment. Those | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: toxic items in search system by integrating feedback from
Row 38: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: annotated phrases are then used for exploring similar toxic con- | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: the search system into the training process.
Row 39: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: tent. As observed, not all the annotated phrases are suitable for an | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: (3) Offline experiments demonstrate that our method outperRow 40: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: efficient search. For example, the phrase “Transferable Commercial | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: forms baseline models and humans in extracting effective
Row 41: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: Performance License (2+ Years) and Radio/TV Program Production | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: queries. The Online deployment shows a significant increase
Row 42: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: License” is overly verbose and may not yield any results in a search | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: in toxic items detection.
Row 43: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: system. Meanwhile, the term “companionship” is too broad and | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for:
Row 44: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: may result in too many irrelevant items. | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: 2 Related Works
Row 45: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: Assistance from models can alleviate the psychological burden | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for:
Row 46: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: on auditors who have been exposed to negative content for a long | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: 2.1 Keyphrase Extraction
Row 47: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: period. To reduce human dependence in the risk understanding | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: Keyphrase extraction approaches can be broadly categorized into
Row 48: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: phase and enhance the efficiency in toxic content exploration, we | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: three main types. Early work in this area follows a pipeline apRow 49: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: introduce the following LLM based automatic query extraction | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: proach, often employing a 2-step method ([4, 10, 20, 32]). Initially,
Row 50: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: approach. | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: a set of candidate phrases is generated using heuristics, part-ofRow 51: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: Generally, existing methods for keyphrase extracting can be | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: speech tags, n-grams, or other techniques. Subsequently, a ranking
Row 52: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: divided into three categories: (1) 2-step keyphrase extraction ([4, 10, | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: model is trained to order the candidates, with the top n phrases
Row 53: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: 20, 32]) which involves generating a set of phrase candidates using | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: being selected as the extracted keyphrases. Sequence labeling, a
Row 54: 国内外QS排名毕业征来图复刻打印定制 (Customized Reproduc-: various methods and subsequently ranking or classifying these | an intuitive sense of which parts of toxic content is efficient for: technique widely used in Named Entity Recognition (NER) ([3, 16]),
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
QExplorer: Large Language Model Based Query Extraction for Toxic Content Exploration Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia
assigned to each token to indicate whether it is part of a keyphrase.
The model is then trained to predict the probability of each token
should be part of the expected keyphrase. In recent years, sequenceto-sequence model have been employed to extract keyphrases
([5, 18, 28]). These models are typically built on pretrained language models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can
be considered as a sequence-to-sequence model, but it features a
novel training design.
2.2 LLM Alignment
Since the launch of ChatGPT, the impact of LLM has been increasingly recognized. In addition to the extensive data used for training,
two other valuable techniques for addressing various tasks are instruction SFT and preference alignment. A well pretrained LLM can
be adapted to various downstream tasks via instruction SFT. These
studies ([21, 27]) have shown the zero-shot ability and generalization of instruction finetuned language models. This study ([ 21])
observes that multi-task instruction finetuned language models
exhibit cross-task generalization, with finetuned models showing
improved performance on unseen tasks. This study ([ 6]) demonstrates that using a series of designed instructions allows finetuned
language models to achieve significant improvements. The study
([22]) by OpenAI combines instruction finetuning and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) and shows an impacted
improvement in the performance of LLM. Additionally, subsequent
LLMs ([2, 23, 26]) have demonstrated the effectiveness of instruction
finetuned LLM in query reformulation for search purposes.
The studies ([22, 26]) demonstrate that implementing RLHF after
instruction SFT can greatly increase the win rate of LLM in generating tasks. Specific comparisons of the performance between
LLMs with RLHF and without RLHF are presented in these studies.
However, RLHF requires a reward model to be trained first, and the
training of RLHF is relatively unstable. Alternative methods like
DPO ([24]) and odds ratio preference optimization (ORPO) ([13])
have been proposed. These methods do not require an explicit reward model; instead, the preference alignment is trained using pairs
of preference data. This study ([14]) focuses on alignment of LLMs
with human feedback, employing both DPO and PPO. DPO exhibits
a promising performance in preference alignment, benefiting from
a simpler design and requiring fewer resources during training.
Fully tuning the parameters of an LLM is expensive because it
involves training all of the model’s parameters. Methods such as
LoRA ([15]), LoRA+([11]) make the adaptation of LLM feasible with
relatively low resources. During training, the parameters of the base
model are frozen, and trainable rank decomposition matrices are
introduced to modify each layer of the transformer. These methods
enable finetuning an LLM with a size of 7B or 14B using a single
A100 GPU.
3 Methodology
Large Language Model based query extraction for toxic content
exploration aims to get the key components within the given piece
of content. These key components may include toxic expressions,
suspicious prompts, or combinations of several rare co-occurrence
phrases. The proposed approach intends to leverage the comprehension and reasoning abilities of LLMs. We propose a two-stage
method, which includes instruction Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)
and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). In this study, we focus
exclusively on the textual information of the reported toxic items.
Figure 2 illustrates the diagram of our method.
Figure 2: A diagram of QExplorer is presented. It contains
three steps: (1) instruction SFT, (2) preference data construction, (3) preference alignment, which involves the wellfinetuned LLM from step (1) using the preference data from
step(2).
3.1 Instruction SFT
Publicly available LLMs tend to refuse to engage with sensible content that involves offensive, sexual, violent or fraudulent languages.
And they are not designed for extracting effective queries for further search. In the query extraction task, these models tend to list
out all the possible phrases. On the other hand, we cannot use a
third party API due to data security and cost concerns. Therefore,
we create training datasets from the logs of our real production system and fine-tune LLMs to enhance their ability to extract effective
queries from toxic content.
As shown in Figure 1, the auditors analyze the reported toxic
content and mark out the improper parts during the risk understanding phase. Most of the annotated phrases are used to search
for similar toxic content. The searched keywords, exposed items
and detected toxic items are stored in the system log. Some typical
examples are provided in Table 1. Not all annotated data is suitable
for creating a training dataset. We select the annotated data with
non-zero amount of exposed items or a length no more than 10. In
this step, we include the annotated keywords regardless of whether
they can lead to toxic items. This is because some keywords that
do not yield toxic items merely indicate the absence of toxic items
in the indices at the searching time, rather than being useless. We
removed data where the annotated phrase length is less than 2 or
greater than 10; these values are based on empirical observation.
We denote the reported toxic content as𝐶, the annotated keywords
set as 𝐾, the number of exposed items caused by keyword 𝑘𝑖 in our
search system as ℎ𝑖𝑡 (𝑘𝑖 ), and the length of keyword 𝑘𝑖 as 𝑙𝑒𝑛 (𝑘𝑖 ).

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: be considered as a sequence-to-sequence model, but it features a | Unnamed: 0:
Row 2: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: novel training design. | Unnamed: 0:
Row 3: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: 2.2 LLM Alignment | Unnamed: 0:
Row 4: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: Since the launch of ChatGPT, the impact of LLM has been increas- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 5: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: ingly recognized. In addition to the extensive data used for training, | Unnamed: 0:
Row 6: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: two other valuable techniques for addressing various tasks are in- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 7: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: struction SFT and preference alignment. A well pretrained LLM can | Unnamed: 0:
Row 8: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: be adapted to various downstream tasks via instruction SFT. These | Unnamed: 0:
Row 9: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: studies ([21, 27]) have shown the zero-shot ability and generaliza- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 10: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: tion of instruction finetuned language models. This study ([21]) | Unnamed: 0:
Row 11: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: observes that multi-task instruction finetuned language models | Unnamed: 0:
Row 12: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: exhibit cross-task generalization, with finetuned models showing | Unnamed: 0:
Row 13: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: improved performance on unseen tasks. This study ([6]) demon- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 14: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: strates that using a series of designed instructions allows finetuned | Unnamed: 0:
Row 15: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: language models to achieve significant improvements. The study | Unnamed: 0:
Row 16: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: ([22]) by OpenAI combines instruction finetuning and reinforce- | Unnamed: 0: Figure 2: A diagram of QExplorer is presented. It contains
Row 17: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: ment learning from human feedback (RLHF) and shows an impacted | Unnamed: 0: three steps: (1) instruction SFT, (2) preference data conRow 18: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: improvement in the performance of LLM. Additionally, subsequent | Unnamed: 0: struction, (3) preference alignment, which involves the wellRow 19: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: LLMs ([2, 23, 26]) have demonstrated the effectiveness of instruction | Unnamed: 0: finetuned LLM from step (1) using the preference data from
Row 20: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: finetuned LLM in query reformulation for search purposes. | Unnamed: 0: step(2).
Row 21: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: The studies ([22, 26]) demonstrate that implementing RLHF after | Unnamed: 0:
Row 22: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: instruction SFT can greatly increase the win rate of LLM in gen- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 23: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: erating tasks. Specific comparisons of the performance between | Unnamed: 0: 3.1 Instruction SFT
Row 24: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: LLMs with RLHF and without RLHF are presented in these studies. | Unnamed: 0:
Row 25: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: Publicly available LLMs tend to refuse to engage with sensible conRow 26: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: However, RLHF requires a reward model to be trained first, and the | Unnamed: 0:
Row 27: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: tent that involves offensive, sexual, violent or fraudulent languages.
Row 28: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: training of RLHF is relatively unstable. Alternative methods like | Unnamed: 0:
Row 29: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: And they are not designed for extracting effective queries for furRow 30: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: DPO ([24]) and odds ratio preference optimization (ORPO) ([13]) | Unnamed: 0:
Row 31: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: ther search. In the query extraction task, these models tend to list
Row 32: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: have been proposed. These methods do not require an explicit re- | Unnamed: 0:
Row 33: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: out all the possible phrases. On the other hand, we cannot use a
Row 34: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: ward model; instead, the preference alignment is trained using pairs | Unnamed: 0:
Row 35: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: third party API due to data security and cost concerns. Therefore,
Row 36: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: of preference data. This study ([14]) focuses on alignment of LLMs | Unnamed: 0:
Row 37: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: we create training datasets from the logs of our real production sysRow 38: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: with human feedback, employing both DPO and PPO. DPO exhibits | Unnamed: 0:
Row 39: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: tem and fine-tune LLMs to enhance their ability to extract effective
Row 40: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: a promising performance in preference alignment, benefiting from | Unnamed: 0:
Row 41: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: queries from toxic content.
Row 42: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: a simpler design and requiring fewer resources during training. | Unnamed: 0:
Row 43: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: As shown in Figure 1, the auditors analyze the reported toxic
Row 44: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: Fully tuning the parameters of an LLM is expensive because it | Unnamed: 0:
Row 45: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: content and mark out the improper parts during the risk underRow 46: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: involves training all of the model’s parameters. Methods such as | Unnamed: 0:
Row 47: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: standing phase. Most of the annotated phrases are used to search
Row 48: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: LoRA ([15]), LoRA+([11]) make the adaptation of LLM feasible with | Unnamed: 0:
Row 49: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: for similar toxic content. The searched keywords, exposed items
Row 50: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: relatively low resources. During training, the parameters of the base | Unnamed: 0:
Row 51: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: and detected toxic items are stored in the system log. Some typical
Row 52: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: model are frozen, and trainable rank decomposition matrices are | Unnamed: 0:
Row 53: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: examples are provided in Table 1. Not all annotated data is suitable
Row 54: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: introduced to modify each layer of the transformer. These methods | Unnamed: 0:
Row 55: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: for creating a training dataset. We select the annotated data with
Row 56: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: enable finetuning an LLM with a size of 7B or 14B using a single | Unnamed: 0:
Row 57: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: non-zero amount of exposed items or a length no more than 10. In
Row 58: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: A100 GPU. | Unnamed: 0:
Row 59: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: this step, we include the annotated keywords regardless of whether
Row 60: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: | Unnamed: 0: they can lead to toxic items. This is because some keywords that
Row 61: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: 3 Methodology | Unnamed: 0: do not yield toxic items merely indicate the absence of toxic items
Row 62: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: Large Language Model based query extraction for toxic content | Unnamed: 0: in the indices at the searching time, rather than being useless. We
Row 63: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: exploration aims to get the key components within the given piece | Unnamed: 0: removed data where the annotated phrase length is less than 2 or
Row 64: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: of content. These key components may include toxic expressions, | Unnamed: 0: greater than 10; these values are based on empirical observation.
Row 65: guage models such as Bert, Bart, T5. Our proposed approach can: suspicious prompts, or combinations of several rare co-occurrence | Unnamed: 0: We denote the reported toxic content as C , the annotated keywords
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia S Ren et al.
Table 2: Prompt example for keyword extraction for toxic
content exploration. Most samples contain only one annotated query, as illustrated in this example. The prompt is
designed to be compatible with multiple queries.
Instruction: 你是一个内容安全专家，需要从违规商品信息中
提取出有助排查相似风险的关键词，关注和违规相关的独特
信息。违规信息如下：
Input: 学生. . . . . .刷多门优惠力度大。软件/程序/网站开发教材
建议某宝购入学起来更方便。
Output: 提取的风险排查关键词集合如下，以英文逗号分隔：
学生. . . . . .刷
(Instruction: You are a content safety expert and need to extract
key words from the improper item’s information to help detect
more similar risks, focusing on the unique information related to
the violations. The improper information is as follows:
Input: Students... cram for multiple courses with great deals. Suggest to buy textbooks on taoxx for more convenient learning of
software/programs/websites development.
Output: The collection of the extracted keywords for risk exploration is as follows, separated by commas: Students... cram.)
The dataset used to for the instruction SFT can be formulated as
follows:
𝐷 =
 


𝑐𝑖, 𝑘𝑖


𝑁
𝑖=1
ℎ𝑖𝑡 𝑘𝑖 | 𝑆 > 0 or 𝑙𝑒𝑛 𝑘𝑖 ≤ 10,
𝑐𝑖 ∼ 𝑝 (𝑥),
𝑙𝑒𝑛 𝑘𝑖 > 1
 

(1)
where 𝑝 (𝑥) denotes the toxic content distribution in Xianyu trading
platform, 𝑆 denotes the Xianyu search engine.
In order to construct some long context data, based on the above
dataset, we cluster the data into thousands of groups according
to toxic content category and similarity. This data is used to construct the preference data and in the ablation study. For each group
we sample up to 20 different items and concatenate the text information together using comma to form content 𝐶, and similarly,
concatenate the qualified keywords using commas. This process
can be formulated as follows:
𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 =
( 
con(𝑐𝑖
𝑠 ), con(𝑘𝑖
𝑠 )


𝑁𝑐,𝑠=𝑛
𝑖=1,𝑠=1
𝑐𝑖𝑠, 𝑘𝑖𝑠
 ∈ 𝐺𝑖,
𝐷 = Ð𝑁𝑐
𝑖=1 𝐺𝑖
)
(2)
where 𝐺𝑖 denoted the clustered content, 𝑐𝑜𝑛 (·) represents the concatenation of the given text. This dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 is further used to
construct the preference alignment data.
We construct the final instruction SFT dataset using the above
datasets and task specific prompts. An example is shown in Table
2. As illustrated in this example, the content 𝐶 is fed into the input
and the annotated keywords 𝐾 are fed into the output part.
In the supervised finetuning process, the concatenation of the
instruction and input in the prompt serves as the input 𝑥, whereas
the output in the prompt serves as label 𝑦. The objective of our
query extraction model is to maximize the conditional probability
𝑝 (𝑦|𝑥). The loss can be depicted as follows:
L𝑆𝐹𝑇 (𝜃 ) = −
∑︁
(𝑥,𝑦 ) ∈𝐷𝑆𝐹𝑇
𝑇∑︁
𝑡 =1
log 𝑃 (𝑦𝑡 |𝑥, 𝑦<𝑡 , 𝜃) (3)
Table 3: Prompt example for preference alignment. The answer is a pair of constructed responses to the given question,
with the first response being preferred over the second according to the condition specified in formula (4).
question: similar to the input of table 2.
system: similar to the instruction of table 2.
answer: [“The collection of the extracted keywords for risk exploration is as follows, separated by commas: Finacea”,
“The collection of the extracted keywords for risk exploration is as
follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]
where 𝐷𝑆𝐹𝑇 represents the dataset for instruction finetuning, 𝜃
denotes the model parameters, and𝑇 denotes the length of the label
sequence 𝑦.
We apply LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models) to finetune the LLMs.
3.2 Preference Alignment
This preference alignment aims to align LLM to the objective of
identifying more similar toxic items. For a given reported toxic
content, we assume the keywords leading to toxic items in a search
engine are more effective than those that only retrieve normal items.
To incorporate search engine feedback into training process simply,
we employ the DPO (Direct Preference Optimization) algorithm. For
each reported toxic content, it is necessary to construct two distinct
sets of keywords, organized in a partial order. The DPO algorithm
is designed to adapt the LLM parameters such that the likelihood
of the preferred response is higher than that of the dispreferred
response. Practically, there is usually one annotated query for a
given reported toxic content. To obtain a pair of partially ordered
keyword sets, we concatenate similar toxic content into a single,
extended context paragraph, ensuring enough keyword candidates
for ordering. Preference alignment data is constructed based on the
dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 . The data construction process in this step could be
formulated as follows:
𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 =
 


con(𝑐𝑖𝑠 ), con(𝑘𝑖𝑝𝑠 ), con(𝑘𝑖
𝑑𝑠 )


𝑁𝑐,𝑠=𝑛
𝑖=1,𝑠=1

𝑐𝑖𝑠, 𝑘𝑖𝑝𝑠 , 𝑘𝑖
𝑑𝑠

∈ 𝐺𝑖,
𝐷 = Ð𝑁𝑐
𝑖=1 𝐺𝑖,
𝑝 (𝑘𝑖𝑝𝑠 | 𝑆) > 0.05,
𝑝 (𝑘𝑖
𝑑𝑠 | 𝑆) ≤ 0.05
 

(4)
where 𝑐𝑜𝑛 (·) denotes the concatenation of the given text, 𝑘𝑖𝑝𝑠
represents the preferred keyword and 𝑘𝑖
𝑑𝑠 represents the dispreferred keyword. 𝑝 (·) denotes the percentage of toxic items can be
found among the logged exposed items by the given keyword on
the search platform. 𝑆 denotes the search engine. Empirically, the
threshold of 𝑝 (·) is set to 0.05. In the subsequent ablation study, we
analyze the model’s performance using different thresholds. Table
3 illustrates a prompt example at this stage. A complete example is
shown in table 8 in the Appendix.

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]
Row 1: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: 学生. . . . . .刷 | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 2: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: (Instruction: You are a content safety expert and need to extract | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 3: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: key words from the improper item’s information to help detect | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 4: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: more similar risks, focusing on the unique information related to | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 5: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: where D represents the dataset for instruction finetuning, θS FT
Row 6: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: the violations. The improper information is as follows: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 7: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: denotes the model parameters, and T denotes the length of the label
Row 8: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: Input: Students... cram for multiple courses with great deals. Sug- | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 9: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: sequence y.
Row 10: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: gest to buy textbooks on taoxx for more convenient learning of | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 11: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: We apply LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language ModRow 12: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: software/programs/websites development. | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 13: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: els) to finetune the LLMs.
Row 14: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: Output: The collection of the extracted keywords for risk explo- | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 15: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: ration is as follows, separated by commas: Students... cram.) | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 16: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: 3.2 Preference Alignment
Row 17: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: This preference alignment aims to align LLM to the objective of
Row 18: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: he dataset used to for the instruction SFT can be formulated as | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: identifying more similar toxic items. For a given reported toxic
Row 19: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: llows: | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: content, we assume the keywords leading to toxic items in a search
Row 20: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔:: ( ) ( ) | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]:
Row 21: Output:提取的风险排查关键词集合如下,以英文逗号分隔::  ( ≤ 10,  ) iN hit k | S > 0 or len k i   | follows, separated by commas: inacea 15%ren” ]: engine are more effective than those that only retrieve normal items.
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=4 index=2]
Columns:   ( i | Unnamed: 0 | ) | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2
Row 1:   ( i:  i=1 len k | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: > 1   | Unnamed: 2: we employ the DPO (Direct Preference Optimization) algorithm. For
Row 2:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: each reported toxic content, it is necessary to construct two distinct
Row 3:   ( i: where p (x) denotes the toxic content distribution in Xianyu trading | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 4:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: sets of keywords, organized in a partial order. The DPO algorithm
Row 5:   ( i: platform, S denotes the Xianyu search engine. | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 6:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: is designed to adapt the LLM parameters such that the likelihood
Row 7:   ( i: In order to construct some long context data, based on the above | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 8:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: of the preferred response is higher than that of the dispreferred
Row 9:   ( i: dataset, we cluster the data into thousands of groups according | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 10:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: response. Practically, there is usually one annotated query for a
Row 11:   ( i: to toxic content category and similarity. This data is used to con- | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 12:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: given reported toxic content. To obtain a pair of partially ordered
Row 13:   ( i: struct the preference data and in the ablation study. For each group | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 14:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: keyword sets, we concatenate similar toxic content into a single,
Row 15:   ( i: we sample up to 20 different items and concatenate the text infor- | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 16:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: extended context paragraph, ensuring enough keyword candidates
Row 17:   ( i: mation together using comma to form content C , and similarly, | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 18:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: for ordering. Preference alignment data is constructed based on the
Row 19:   ( i: concatenate the qualified keywords using commas. This process | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 20:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: dataset D . The data construction process in this step could becat
Row 21:   ( i: can be formulated as follows: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 22:   ( i: { | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: ( )} | Unnamed: 2: formulated as follows:
Row 23:   ( i: ( | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: ) N ,s=nc i i i | Unnamed: 2:
Row 24:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: c , k ∈ G , | Unnamed: 2:
Row 25:   ( i: D (2)cat = con (c ), s i con (k ) | Unnamed: 0: | ): i s | Unnamed: 1: s i =1 =1 D = ,s ⋃ si=1Nc Gi | Unnamed: 2:
Row 26:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: D =comp ( )
Row 27:   ( i: where G denoted the clustered content, con(·) represents the con-i ∈ G , catenation of the given text. This dataset D | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: ccat is further used to | Unnamed: 2:     ( ) N ,s=n c , k s i ⋃ psi N , k c ds i ii 
Row 28:   ( i: construct the preference alignment data. | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: con( ic ), con( k i ) con( , k i) D = i=1G ,
Row 29:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: s ps
Row 30:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:  ds i 
Row 31:   ( i: We construct the final instruction SFT dataset using the above | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:    i=1,s=1 p (k ps i | S) > 0.05, 
Row 32:   ( i: datasets and task specific prompts. An example is shown in Table | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:  p (k | S) ≤ 0.05 
Row 33:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: ds
Row 34:   ( i: 2. As illustrated in this example, the content C is fed into the input | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: (4)
Row 35:   ( i: iand the annotated keywords K are fed into the output part. | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: where con(·) denotes the concatenation of the given text, kps
Row 36:   ( i: In the supervised finetuning process, the concatenation of the | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: represents the preferred keyword and k irepresents the dispreRow 37:   ( i: | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: ds
Row 38:   ( i: instruction and input in the prompt serves as the input x , whereas | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: ferred keyword. p (·) denotes the percentage of toxic items can be
Row 39:   ( i: the output in the prompt serves as label y. The objective of our | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: found among the logged exposed items by the given keyword on
Row 40:   ( i: query extraction model is to maximize the conditional probability | Unnamed: 0: | ): | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: the search platform. S denotes the search engine. Empirically, the
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
QExplorer: Large Language Model Based Query Extraction for Toxic Content Exploration Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia
In the preference alignment training, the concatenation of the
content of the system and the question within the prompt constitutes the input 𝑥. The preferred answer is denoted as the label 𝑦𝑝,
while the dispreferred answer is denoted as the label𝑦𝑑. The initialized LLM acts as a reference model with fixed parameters𝜃𝑟 during
training. As derived in [24], the loss for DPO can be expressed as
follows:
L𝐷𝑃𝑂 (𝜃 ) =
−E(𝑥,𝑦 𝑝,𝑦𝑑 ) ∈𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝
h
log 𝜎

𝛽 log 𝑃 (𝑦𝑝 |𝑥,𝜃 )
𝑃 (𝑦𝑝 |𝑥,𝜃𝑟 ) − 𝛽 log 𝑃 (𝑦𝑑 |𝑥,𝜃 )
𝑃 (𝑦𝑑 |𝑥,𝜃𝑟 )
i
(5)
where 𝑃 (·) represents the likelihood of the label with the given
condition. The variable 𝜃 denotes the trainable LLM parameters,
while 𝜃𝑟 denotes the fixed reference LLM parameters. 𝛽 is a hyper
parameter that controlls the deviation from the reference policy as
described in [24]. To maintain the ability of generating outputs as
an LLM, the loss function for preference alignment is formed as
follows:
L (𝜃 ) = 𝛾 L𝑆𝐹𝑇 (𝜃 ) + L 𝐷𝑃𝑂 (𝜃 ) (6)
where L𝑆𝐹𝑇 is as equation (3), L𝑆𝐹𝑇 is as equation (5), 𝛾 is a hyper
parameter.
We also utilize LoRA to perform finetuning for DPO.
3.3 Online Service
The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illustrated in Figure 1. The aligned LLM is utilized to perform query
extraction in the risk understanding phase, as shown in Figure 3.
This model complements human analysis. We deploy a data process
pipeline on our Dataworks platform, which operates on a scheduled mode. Each day, the system receives a bunch of reported toxic
items, and the textual information is fed into the finetuned LLM
for inference. These reported toxic items are also analyzed by auditors. Both human annotated queries and LLM extracted queries are
then used to create search tasks for further exploration. Each exploration task includes dozens of queries, with semantically similar
queries are clustered into a single task. Whether a query originates
from human annotation or LLM suggestion is logged so that we
can assess the effectiveness of the proposed model. If an LLM suggested query matches a human annotated query, it is labeled as
provided by a human. The online performance is evaluated in this
implementation.
4 Experiments
4.1 Datasets
The data for training is processed from half year logs from our toxic
content exploration system, covering the period of [11.19. 2023,
05.19.2024]. We construct 25772 pairs of <toxic content, phrases>
for dataset 𝐷, 2378 pairs long context samples for 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 . Both 𝐷
and 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 are described in Section 3. The long context dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡
has an average length of 402 characters, while dataset 𝐷 has an
average length of 154 characters. During training, the cutoff length
of the input token sequence is set to 2048. For instruction SFT, we
constructed 3 datasets using 𝐷, 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 and 𝐷 + 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 respectively to
study the effectiveness of different combination.
Figure 3: The diagram of the online implementation. The
LLM in the shadowed part runs offline. Currently, this LLM
can only process textual information. Therefore, the system
still requires auditor to do risk understanding.
Table 4: Statistics of datasets.
Stage Dataset # Samples
Instruction SFT
𝐷 25772
𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 2378
𝐷 + 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 27193
Preference Alignment 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 619
𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 2 679
Test 𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑑 _20241020 402
For preference alignment, using the method described in Section
3, we constructed about 600 preference samples.
Table 4 shows the statistics of the datasets used in this study.
For the offline evaluation, we utilize the logged reported toxic
items in our system after 05.19.2024. Using the same preprocessing
as for training, we feed the text data into the finetuned LLM for
inference. The offline test data presented in this study is derived
from the reported toxic items of 10.20.2024.
4.2 Offline Experiment Settings
4.2.1 Baselines. We compare QExplorer with typical methods used
for keyword extraction, some LLMs and humans. The methods used
for comparison are listed below.
TF-IDF is a simple method for selecting top N terms according
to TF-IDF scores. Jieba segmentation is used in this study. N is set
to equal the number of test samples.
Bi-LSTM-CRF([1]) is a sequence labeling method. In our implementation, BIO tagging is used, where B and I tags are assigned
to keywords, and words out of keywords are labeled to O. The
Bi-LSTM-CRF model is trained on dataset 𝐷 for 500 epochs. Both
the embedding size and hidden size are set to 256. The training
data used in [1] consists more than 0.5 million documents, which
is larger than the size of our SFT dataset 𝐷.
BART([5, 17]) is a pretrained language model with encoderdecoder architecture for generation, translation, and comprehension tasks. It can be easily adapted to extract keyword and demonstrates competitive performance with state-of-the-art keyphrase

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus- | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2
Row 1: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: Test D | Unnamed: 1: r epor ted_20241020 | Unnamed: 2: 402.0
Row 2: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: trated in Figure 1. The aligned LLM is utilized to perform query | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 3: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: extraction in the risk understanding phase, as shown in Figure 3. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 4: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: This model complements human analysis. We deploy a data process | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 5: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: For preference alignment, using the method described in Section | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 6: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: pipeline on our Dataworks platform, which operates on a sched- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 7: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: 3, we constructed about 600 preference samples. | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 8: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: uled mode. Each day, the system receives a bunch of reported toxic | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 9: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: Table 4 shows the statistics of the datasets used in this study. | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 10: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: items, and the textual information is fed into the finetuned LLM | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 11: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: For the offline evaluation, we utilize the logged reported toxic | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 12: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: for inference. These reported toxic items are also analyzed by audi- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 13: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: items in our system after 05.19.2024. Using the same preprocessing | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 14: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: tors. Both human annotated queries and LLM extracted queries are | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 15: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: as for training, we feed the text data into the finetuned LLM for | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 16: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: then used to create search tasks for further exploration. Each ex- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 17: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: inference. The offline test data presented in this study is derived | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 18: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: ploration task includes dozens of queries, with semantically similar | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 19: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: from the reported toxic items of 10.20.2024. | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 20: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: queries are clustered into a single task. Whether a query originates | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 21: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: from human annotation or LLM suggestion is logged so that we | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 22: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: | Unnamed: 0: 4.2 Offline Experiment Settings | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 23: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: can assess the effectiveness of the proposed model. If an LLM sug- | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 24: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: gested query matches a human annotated query, it is labeled as | Unnamed: 0: 4.2.1 Baselines. We compare QExplorer with typical methods used | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
Row 25: The framework of our toxic content exploration system is illus-: provided by a human. The online performance is evaluated in this | Unnamed: 0: for keyword extraction, some LLMs and humans. The methods used | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia S Ren et al.
generation on several benchmarks. In this study, bart-large is supervised finetuned to extract query with dataset 𝐷 for 5 epochs.
Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff
of input sequence is set to 1024.
Base LLMs A powerful LLM demonstrates impressive zero-shot
capabilities across various tasks. However, in query extraction, a
base LLM without SFT tends to list all the possible keywords. To
ensure a fair comparison, we use a slightly modified prompt, as
shown in Table 2, for LLMs without SFT. In the prompt, we instruct
the LLM to arrange the keywords in descending order of risk, then
select the top 1 keyword for evaluation. Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct and
GPT4 Turbo 128k are evaluated through local deployment, while
GPT4 Turbo 128k is evaluated via the Azure OpenAI API. Other base
LLMs used in this study, such as Qwen1.5-7B-Chat and ChatGLM36B, cannot follow the instructions well without SFT.
4.2.2 Search Engine and Retrieval Setup. We do not build an isolated search engine for the offline evaluation, the online search
engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create
a series of retrieval tasks that includes all the queries extracted
by LLMs or annotated by humans. The data retrieved from the
search system is collected before the auditors start to explore. Once
auditors begin their exploration, the search system becomes nonstationary because the toxic items are removed as soon as they
are detected. The retrieval data collection takes about 1 to 2 hours,
during which the search system can be considered approximately
static. As the detection system depicted in Figure 1 runs for 1 to
2 days after the retrieval data collection is completed, most of the
toxic items in the system are labeled by auditors, we then use these
toxic labels to calculate the offline metrics.
4.3 Evaluation Tasks and Metrics
It is hard to set a gold standard for the query extraction for toxic
content exploration. For a given reported toxic content, the most
effective query for exploration depends on the items’ distribution
of the search engine at a certain moment. Even an auditor may
be unable to determine which query is optimal without conducting a search. For a given reported toxic item, an auditor can only
assess whether the extracted query is acceptable based on their
understanding. When an item is detected as toxic, it is removed
from the search system. And in the online application, the human
annotated queries have higher priority to search. Thus, we ave
designed the following five criteria to evaluate the quality of the
extracted queries.
Query hit rate, the percent of queries that could lead to the
discovery of toxic items. This metric measures the model’s ability
to extract effective queries for toxic content exploration and is
evaluated offline.
Number of hit@100, the number of the toxic items found among
the top 100 retrieved items in the search system using a given query.
This metric is proportional to recall and measures the retrieval
effectiveness of queries suggested by models or humans, and is
evaluated offline.
Query acceptance rate, depicts the chosen probability of the extracted queries by an auditor in online application, and is evaluated
online. This metric is related to the offline query hit rate.
Toxic item detection increment, depicts the additional toxic items
detected through the LLM suggested queries in an online application. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of
hit@100.
Hit query increment, depicts the additional queries that can
retrieve toxic items compared to human, evaluated online.
4.4 Implementation Details
We utilize the open-source framework LLaMa-Factory ([ 33]) for
training. Qwen1.5-7b-chat ([2]) and ChatGLM3-6B ([8]) are used as
the base models for finetuning. During the instruction SFT stage,
the model is trained for 2 epochs with a learning rate of 3e-5. In
the preference alignment stage, the finetuned model from the instruction SFT stage undergoes further training for 5 epochs with
the same learning rate of 3e-5. The maximum length of the input
token sequence is set to 2048. The LoRA method is used in the
both stages, with the rank decomposition matrices employed for
all the linear modules of a specific LLM. The optimizer is AdamW.
The parameter 𝛽 in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter 𝛾 in
equation (6) is set to 1.0.
4.5 Offline Effectiveness Analysis
Table 5 presents the main results of human, baseline models and
QExplorer in metrics of Number of hit@100 and Query Hit Rate.
The proposed method Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) outperforms all other models. Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA) is trained on
dataset 𝐷. Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) is further trained
on the preference dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 on base of Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT,
LoRA). The Query Hit Rate of Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA)
is 0.561, which is higher than human labeled data by 14.7%. It
suggests that QExplorer can give more effective queries for toxic
content exploration than humans. In metric Number of hit@100, it
is observed that queries suggested by QExplorer can detect more
toxic items than queries given by human.
Large pretrained generative models outperforms TF-IDF and
Bi-LSTM-CRF in query extraction. The TF-IDF and Bi-LSTM-CRF
methods are less efficient than these generative models. TF-IDF
tends to yield short queries, the efficiency of each query is not
as high as other methods. Since the boundaries of queries in our
situation are not strict, Bi-LSTM-CRF tends to assign more "O" tags
to words within a sentence, resulting in fewer queries extracted
compared to other methods. Bart is a powerful pretrained model;
considering both Number of hit@100 and Query Hit Rate, BART
(SFT) performs better than TF-IDF and Bi-LSTM-CRF. The results
given by BART (SFT) is a strong baseline. The results given by
GPT4 Turbo 128k and Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct are strong baselines
too. Notably, GPT4 Turbo 128k surpasses human performance in
this evaluation. However, GPT4 Turbo 128k suggests fewer queries
than most of other methods, as it refuses to respond to questions
involving offensive, sexual, violent content, etc. Nevertheless, GPT4
Turbo 128k does not surpass the finetuned Qwen1.5-7B-Chat. This
observation indicates the necessity of aligning an LLM to a specific
domain using customized data in practice.
The comparison between Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA)
and Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA) demonstrates that further search
system preference alignment improves the Query Hit Rate by 10.4%

[TABLE page=6 index=2]
Columns: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in
Row 1: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: a series of retrieval tasks that includes all the queries extracted | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: equation (6) is set to 1.0.
Row 2: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: by LLMs or annotated by humans. The data retrieved from the | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in:
Row 3: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: search system is collected before the auditors start to explore. Once | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in:
Row 4: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: 4.5 Offline Effectiveness Analysis
Row 5: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: auditors begin their exploration, the search system becomes non- | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in:
Row 6: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: stationary because the toxic items are removed as soon as they | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: Table 5 presents the main results of human, baseline models and
Row 7: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: are detected. The retrieval data collection takes about 1 to 2 hours, | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: QExplorer in metrics of Number of hit@100 and Query Hit Rate.
Row 8: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: during which the search system can be considered approximately | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: The proposed method Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) outperRow 9: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: static. As the detection system depicted in Figure 1 runs for 1 to | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: forms all other models. Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA) is trained on
Row 10: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: 2 days after the retrieval data collection is completed, most of the | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: dataset D . Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) is further trained
Row 11: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: toxic items in the system are labeled by auditors, we then use these | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: on the preference dataset D on base of Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT,comp
Row 12: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: toxic labels to calculate the offline metrics. | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: LoRA). The Query Hit Rate of Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA)
Row 13: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: is 0.561, which is higher than human labeled data by 14.7%. It
Row 14: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: suggests that QExplorer can give more effective queries for toxic
Row 15: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: 4.3 Evaluation Tasks and Metrics | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: content exploration than humans. In metric Number of hit@100, it
Row 16: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: It is hard to set a gold standard for the query extraction for toxic | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: is observed that queries suggested by QExplorer can detect more
Row 17: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: content exploration. For a given reported toxic content, the most | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: toxic items than queries given by human.
Row 18: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: effective query for exploration depends on the items’ distribution | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: Large pretrained generative models outperforms TF-IDF and
Row 19: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: of the search engine at a certain moment. Even an auditor may | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: Bi-LSTM-CRF in query extraction. The TF-IDF and Bi-LSTM-CRF
Row 20: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: be unable to determine which query is optimal without conduct- | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: methods are less efficient than these generative models. TF-IDF
Row 21: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: ing a search. For a given reported toxic item, an auditor can only | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: tends to yield short queries, the efficiency of each query is not
Row 22: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: assess whether the extracted query is acceptable based on their | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: as high as other methods. Since the boundaries of queries in our
Row 23: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: understanding. When an item is detected as toxic, it is removed | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: situation are not strict, Bi-LSTM-CRF tends to assign more "O" tags
Row 24: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: from the search system. And in the online application, the human | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: to words within a sentence, resulting in fewer queries extracted
Row 25: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: annotated queries have higher priority to search. Thus, we ave | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: compared to other methods. Bart is a powerful pretrained model;
Row 26: engine is used. For a given set of reported toxic content, we create: designed the following five criteria to evaluate the quality of the | The parameter β in equation (5) is set to 0.1. The parameter γ in: considering both Number of hit@100 and Query Hit Rate, BART
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=6 index=3]
Columns: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of
Row 1: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: of input sequence is set to 1024. | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: hit@100.
Row 2: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: Base LLMs A powerful LLM demonstrates impressive zero-shot | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: Hit query increment, depicts the additional queries that can
Row 3: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: capabilities across various tasks. However, in query extraction, a | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: retrieve toxic items compared to human, evaluated online.
Row 4: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: base LLM without SFT tends to list all the possible keywords. To | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of:
Row 5: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: ensure a fair comparison, we use a slightly modified prompt, as | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: 4.4 Implementation Details
Row 6: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: shown in Table 2, for LLMs without SFT. In the prompt, we instruct | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of:
Row 7: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: We utilize the open-source framework LLaMa-Factory ([33]) for
Row 8: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: the LLM to arrange the keywords in descending order of risk, then | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of:
Row 9: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: training. Qwen1.5-7b-chat ([2]) and ChatGLM3-6B ([8]) are used as
Row 10: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: select the top 1 keyword for evaluation. Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct and | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of:
Row 11: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: the base models for finetuning. During the instruction SFT stage,
Row 12: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: GPT4 Turbo 128k are evaluated through local deployment, while | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of:
Row 13: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: the model is trained for 2 epochs with a learning rate of 3e-5. In
Row 14: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: GPT4 Turbo 128k is evaluated via the Azure OpenAI API. Other base | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of:
Row 15: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: the preference alignment stage, the finetuned model from the inRow 16: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: LLMs used in this study, such as Qwen1.5-7B-Chat and ChatGLM3- | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of:
Row 17: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: struction SFT stage undergoes further training for 5 epochs with
Row 18: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: 6B, cannot follow the instructions well without SFT. | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of:
Row 19: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: the same learning rate of 3e-5. The maximum length of the input
Row 20: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: token sequence is set to 2048. The LoRA method is used in the
Row 21: Since BART cannot handle data more than 1024 tokens, the cutoff: 4.2.2 Search Engine and Retrieval Setup. We do not build an iso- | tion. This is evaluated online and relates to the offline number of: both stages, with the rank decomposition matrices employed for
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
QExplorer: Large Language Model Based Query Extraction for Toxic Content Exploration Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia
Table 5: Performance of different LLMs and humans. The best results are in bold, while the second-best results are underlined.
The term"Number of hit@100" refers to the total amount of toxic items among the top 100 retrieved items. The term "# Queries"
refers to the number of extracted queries by each method with the same given content. "# Effective Queries" refers to the
number of queries that can retrieve toxic items.
Method Number of hit@100 # Queries # Effective Queries Query Hit Rate
Human 725 321 157 0.489
TF-IDF 315 402 170 0.423
Bi-LSTM-CRF 219 85 34 0.400
BART (SFT) 799 347 134 0.386
Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct 757 305 135 0.442
GPT4 Turbo 128k 1082 247 130 0.526
Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA) 1212 325 165 0.508
Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) 1321 296 166 0.561
(0.508 v.s. 0.561), enabling the model to extract more effective
queries. The objective of preference alignment is to generative
queries that can retrieve toxic items, rather than merely producing
queries that agree with human annotations, which is the goal of
the instruction SFT.
4.6 Ablation Study
In this section, we evaluate the performance of QExplorer by varying base LLMs and training data as shown in Table 6.
4.6.1 Different Base LLMs. ChatGLM3-6B has a different model architecture and uses different pretraining data compared to Qwen1.57B-Chat. The two models’ size are comparable. As shown in Table 6,
the ChatGLM3-6B’s performance is not as good as that of Qwen1.57B-Chat on this test dataset, but both LLMs demonstrate that further
alignment with preference data results in a higher Query Hit Rate.
4.6.2 Different SFT Data. Table 6 shows that LLMs aligned within
the QExplorer framework performs better than those aligned only
through SFT. To determine whether improved performance is due
to the long context samples not included in dataset𝐷, we conducted
experiments by varying the SFT data from 𝐷 to 𝐷 + 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 . Although
Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA, 𝐷+𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) and ChatGLM3-6B (SFT,
LoRA, 𝐷+𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) outperform their respective LLMs finetuned with
dataset 𝐷, they still cannot surpass the performance of the corresponding LLMs aligned using the QExplorer framework (dataset
𝐷 is used in the instruction SFT stage). Further preference alignment improves the performance of both Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT,
LoRA, 𝐷+𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) and ChatGLM3-6B (SFT, LoRA, 𝐷+𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ). We believe the QExplorer framework works in Qwen1.5-7B-Chat and
ChatGLM3-6B when using this data recipe. We observe that the
improvement provided by QExplorer on Qwen1.5-7B-Chat is more
pronounced than on ChatGLM3-6B. This indicates that the ideal
alignment recipe for various pretrained models may differ due to
differences in model architecture, pretraining data, and training
process. This comprehensive comparison was conducted after several months of online implementation. Although Qwen1.5-7B-Chat
(QExplorer, LoRA, 𝐷+𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) has the best performance, our online
service uses Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) at the time of
writing.
4.6.3 Different Preference Data. In Section 3.2, the dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝
is constructed with a threshold of 𝑝 (·) = 0.05. To assess the impact
of the threshold for selecting preferred keywords, we constructed
another dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 2, where 𝑝 (·) = 0. In dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 2, a larger
number of less efficient queries are selected as the preferred keywords. In Table 6, the models in the "Different Preference Data"
group use dataset 𝐷 for instruction SFT. We observe that dataset
𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 2 can still improve the corresponding models’ performance
in Query Hit Rate, but not as effectively as dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 . In term
of Number of hit@100, the dataset 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 2 fails to improve the
performance of the model in the instruction SFT stage.
4.6.4 Preference Alignment Analysis. Table 6 shows that for the
comparison between LLMs trained with SFT and the QExplorer
framework, the LLM trained with our QExplorer framework performs better. This indicates that preference alignment can further
improve the performance of LLMs in this query extraction task
within the above experimental settings. However, not all DPO processes can enhance a model’s performance; this study ([29]) shows
that DPO cannot surpass the SFT model performance on the code
generation benchmark APPS ([12]). In this query extraction task,
LLMs trained through SFT tend to generate a wider variety of
queries compared to those trained using the QExplorer framework.
This suggests that preference alignment reduces the diversity of
the generated queries, which is expected, as queries differing only
by auxiliary tokens are not helpful for exploration.
4.7 Online Performance
Following the offline validation of the effectiveness of the Qwen1.57B-Chat (QExplorer), we have been deploying this version of LLM
in our online service since June 17th, 2024. The implementation
details are in Section 3.3. The online performance demonstrated
in this study is assessed using data collected over a period of 20
weeks (from 06.17.2024 to 11.02.2024). The results are shown in
Table 7 and Figure 4. The LLM suggested queries have an average
acceptance rate of 61.6%, which is competitive with that of queries

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Method | Number of hit@100 | # Queries | # Effective Queries | Query Hit Rate
Row 1: Method: Human | Number of hit@100: 725 | # Queries: 321 | # Effective Queries: 157 | Query Hit Rate: 0.489
Row 2: Method: TF-IDF | Number of hit@100: 315 | # Queries: 402 | # Effective Queries: 170 | Query Hit Rate: 0.423
Row 3: Method: Bi-LSTM-CRF | Number of hit@100: 219 | # Queries: 85 | # Effective Queries: 34 | Query Hit Rate: 0.4
Row 4: Method: BART (SFT) | Number of hit@100: 799 | # Queries: 347 | # Effective Queries: 134 | Query Hit Rate: 0.386
Row 5: Method: Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct | Number of hit@100: 757 | # Queries: 305 | # Effective Queries: 135 | Query Hit Rate: 0.442
Row 6: Method: GPT4 Turbo 128k | Number of hit@100: 1082 | # Queries: 247 | # Effective Queries: 130 | Query Hit Rate: 0.526
Row 7: Method: Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA) | Number of hit@100: 1212 | # Queries: 325 | # Effective Queries: 165 | Query Hit Rate: 0.508
Row 8: Method: Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) | Number of hit@100: 1321 | # Queries: 296 | # Effective Queries: 166 | Query Hit Rate: 0.561
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia S Ren et al.
Table 6: Ablation study of various base models, different SFT and preference alignment data.
Ablation Aspect Method Number of
hit@100 # Queries # Effective
Queries
Query
Hit Rate
Control Group Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA) 1212 325 165 0.508
Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) 1321 296 166 0.561
Different
Base LLM
ChatGLM3-6B (SFT, LoRA) 1183 321 151 0.470
ChatGLM3-6B (QExplorer, LoRA) 1232 304 154 0.507
Different
SFT Data
Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA, 𝐷 + 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) 1160 327 170 0.520
Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA, , 𝐷 + 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) 1339 299 172 0.575
ChatGLM3-6B (SFT, LoRA, 𝐷 + 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) 1309 326 162 0.500
ChatGLM3-6B (QExplorer, LoRA, 𝐷 + 𝐷𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) 1332 296 170 0.574
Different
Preference Data
Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA, 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 2) 1207 294 160 0.544
ChatGLM3-6B (QExplorer, LoRA, 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 2) 1198 304 152 0.500
Table 7: Online performance of the queries suggested by LLM
and human.
Method
Query
acceptance
rate
Toxic item
detection
increment
Hit
query
increment
Human 78.7% - Qwen1.5-7B-Chat
(QExplorer) 61.6% 59.9% 39.9%
given by humans, especially considering that queries overlapping
between the LLM and humans are classified as human annotations.
Approximately 20% of the queries suggested by the LLM coincide
with human annotations. The average toxic item detection increment is 59.9%, indicating that the queries suggested by the LLM
enable auditors to identify 59.9% more toxic items. The average hit
query increment is 39.9%.
5 Conclusion and Discussion
In the content safety area, one challenging issue is how to detect all
the suspicious content with a limit amount of given toxic content.
Xianyu is a second-hand trading platform, and each day a small
number of toxic items are reported to our system. To maintain Xianyu as a healthy community, we need to address all these reported
toxic items. Previously, the toxic content analysis was performed
by auditors. In this study, we propose a method QExplorer to assist
auditors to explore toxic items more efficiently. Firstly, we formulate this issue as a query extraction problem using LLM. Next, we
construct two datasets from the logs of the online system with
well-designed restrictions. To construct long context samples, we
cluster the toxic items according to their category and similarity,
then concatenate the similar content to form a reasonable long
context. For preference alignment, we use the search engine as
a reward model to select queries that are more effective. DPO is
used to align the LLM with search system preferences. Both the
instruction SFT and preference alignment are trained using LoRA.
We introduce several metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of the
(a) Query acceptance rate of our online service. The blue line with solid
points indicates the result of human annotated queries. The orange
line with hollow points indicates the result of the additional queries
suggested by model.
(b) The vertical axis indicates the increment rate. The blue line with
solid points indicates the toxic item detection increment given by model
suggested queries. The orange line with hollow points indicates the hit
query increment.
Figure 4: Online performance over time.
proposed method, QExplorer. Results of offline experiments show
that the queries suggested by Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer) outperform the queries crafted by human. Online experiments reveal
that Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer) can suggest a substantial percentage of high quality queries and significantly enhance toxic item
detection.
Our future work will focus on the following aspects: In this study,
the data for the preference alignment is scarce. We can use beam
search of LLM or results of different version of LLM, along with
the feedback from search engine, to construct more data. Currently,
we focus only on textual information for toxic content exploration.
Visual information is also important, and multimodal finetuning of
LLM can be considered in future.

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | Unnamed: 2 | Number of | # Effective | Query
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: Ablation Aspect | Unnamed: 1: Method | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: # Queries | # Effective: | Query:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: hit@100 | # Effective: Queries | Query: Hit Rate
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA) | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: 1212 325 | # Effective: 165 | Query: 0.508
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: Control Group | Unnamed: 1: | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: | # Effective: | Query:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA) | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: 1321 296 | # Effective: 166 | Query: 0.561
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: Different | Unnamed: 1: ChatGLM3-6B (SFT, LoRA) | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: 1183 321 | # Effective: 151 | Query: 0.470
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: Base LLM | Unnamed: 1: ChatGLM3-6B (QExplorer, LoRA) | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: 1232 304 | # Effective: 154 | Query: 0.507
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (SFT, LoRA, D + D 0.520cat | Unnamed: 2: ) | Number of: 1160 327 | # Effective: 170 | Query:
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: Different | Unnamed: 1: Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA, , D + D | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: 0.575cat) 1339 299 | # Effective: 172 | Query:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: SFT Data | Unnamed: 1: ChatGLM3-6B (SFT, LoRA, D + D 0.500cat) | Unnamed: 2: | Number of: 1309 326 | # Effective: 162 | Query:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ChatGLM3-6B (QExplorer, LoRA, D + D | Unnamed: 2: 0.574cat | Number of: ) 1332 296 | # Effective: 170 | Query:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: Different | Unnamed: 1: Qwen1.5-7B-Chat (QExplorer, LoRA, D | Unnamed: 2: 0.544comp2 | Number of: ) 1207 294 | # Effective: 160 | Query:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: Preference Data | Unnamed: 1: ChatGLM3-6B (QExplorer, LoRA, D 0.500comp | Unnamed: 2: 2) | Number of: 1198 304 | # Effective: 152 | Query:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
QExplorer: Large Language Model Based Query Extraction for Toxic Content Exploration Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia
References
[1] Rabah Alzaidy, Cornelia Caragea, and C. Lee Giles. 2019. Bi-LSTM-CRF Sequence
Labeling for Keyphrase Extraction from Scholarly Documents. In The World
Wide Web Conference (San Francisco, CA, USA) (WWW ’19). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2551–2557. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3308558.3313642
[2] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan,
Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Luo Ji, Mei Li, Junyang Lin, Runji
Lin, Dayiheng Liu, Gao Liu, Chengqiang Lu, Keming Lu, Jianxin Ma, Rui Men,
Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Chuanqi Tan, Sinan Tan, Jianhong Tu, Peng
Wang, Shijie Wang, Wei Wang, Shengguang Wu, Benfeng Xu, Jin Xu, An Yang,
Hao Yang, Jian Yang, Shusheng Yang, Yang Yao, Bowen Yu, Hongyi Yuan, Zheng
Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, Xingxuan Zhang, Yichang Zhang, Zhenru Zhang, Chang
Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Xiaohuan Zhou, and Tianhang Zhu. 2023. Qwen Technical
Report. arXiv:2309.16609 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16609
[3] Jason P. C. Chiu and Eric Nichols. 2016. Named Entity Recognition with Bidirectional LSTM-CNNs. arXiv:1511.08308 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.08308
[4] Minseok Choi, Chaeheon Gwak, Seho Kim, Si Hyeong Kim, and Jaegul Choo.
2023. SimCKP: Simple Contrastive Learning of Keyphrase Representations.
arXiv:2310.08221 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08221
[5] Md Faisal Mahbub Chowdhury, Gaetano Rossiello, Michael Glass, Nandana Mihindukulasooriya, and Alfio Gliozzo. 2022. Applying a Generic
Sequence-to-Sequence Model for Simple and Effective Keyphrase Generation.
arXiv:2201.05302 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.05302
[6] Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus,
Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan
Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai,
Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts,
Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. 2022. Scaling Instruction-Finetuned
Language Models. arXiv:2210.11416 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11416
[7] Zhengxiao Du, Yujie Qian, Xiao Liu, Ming Ding, Jiezhong Qiu, Zhilin Yang, and
Jie Tang. 2022. GLM: General Language Model Pretraining with Autoregressive
Blank Infilling. arXiv:2103.10360 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.10360
[8] Team GLM, :, Aohan Zeng, Bin Xu, Bowen Wang, Chenhui Zhang, Da Yin, Dan
Zhang, Diego Rojas, Guanyu Feng, Hanlin Zhao, Hanyu Lai, Hao Yu, Hongning
Wang, Jiadai Sun, Jiajie Zhang, Jiale Cheng, Jiayi Gui, Jie Tang, Jing Zhang, Jingyu
Sun, Juanzi Li, Lei Zhao, Lindong Wu, Lucen Zhong, Mingdao Liu, Minlie Huang,
Peng Zhang, Qinkai Zheng, Rui Lu, Shuaiqi Duan, Shudan Zhang, Shulin Cao,
Shuxun Yang, Weng Lam Tam, Wenyi Zhao, Xiao Liu, Xiao Xia, Xiaohan Zhang,
Xiaotao Gu, Xin Lv, Xinghan Liu, Xinyi Liu, Xinyue Yang, Xixuan Song, Xunkai
Zhang, Yifan An, Yifan Xu, Yilin Niu, Yuantao Yang, Yueyan Li, Yushi Bai, Yuxiao
Dong, Zehan Qi, Zhaoyu Wang, Zhen Yang, Zhengxiao Du, Zhenyu Hou, and
Zihan Wang. 2024. ChatGLM: A Family of Large Language Models from GLM130B to GLM-4 All Tools. arXiv:2406.12793 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
[9] Xiaotao Gu, Zihan Wang, Zhenyu Bi, Yu Meng, Liyuan Liu, Jiawei Han, and Jingbo
Shang. 2021. UCPhrase: Unsupervised Context-aware Quality Phrase Tagging.
In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery &
Data Mining (KDD ’21). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467397
[10] Kazi Saidul Hasan and Vincent Ng. 2014. Automatic Keyphrase Extraction: A
Survey of the State of the Art. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Kristina
Toutanova and Hua Wu (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland, 1262–1273. https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/P14-1119
[11] Soufiane Hayou, Nikhil Ghosh, and Bin Yu. 2024. LoRA+: Efficient Low Rank
Adaptation of Large Models. arXiv:2402.12354 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/
2402.12354
[12] Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora,
Ethan Guo, Collin Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring Coding Challenge Competence With APPS.
arXiv:2105.09938 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.09938
[13] Jiwoo Hong, Noah Lee, and James Thorne. 2024. ORPO: Monolithic Preference
Optimization without Reference Model. arXiv:2403.07691 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.
org/abs/2403.07691
[14] Zhenyu Hou, Yilin Niu, Zhengxiao Du, Xiaohan Zhang, Xiao Liu, Aohan Zeng,
Qinkai Zheng, Minlie Huang, Hongning Wang, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. 2024.
ChatGLM-RLHF: Practices of Aligning Large Language Models with Human
Feedback. arXiv:2404.00934 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00934
[15] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean
Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large
Language Models. arXiv:2106.09685 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685
[16] Guillaume Lample, Miguel Ballesteros, Sandeep Subramanian, Kazuya Kawakami,
and Chris Dyer. 2016. Neural Architectures for Named Entity Recognition.
arXiv:1603.01360 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.01360
[17] Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman
Mohamed, Omer Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. BART:
Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language Generation, Translation, and Comprehension. arXiv:1910.13461 [cs.CL] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1910.13461
[18] Rui Liu, Zheng Lin, Peng Fu, and Weiping Wang. 2020. Reinforced Keyphrase
Generation with BERT-based Sentence Scorer. In 2020 IEEE Intl Conf on Parallel & Distributed Processing with Applications, Big Data & Cloud Computing, Sustainable Computing & Communications, Social Computing & Networking (ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom). 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISPABDCloud-SocialCom-SustainCom51426.2020.00027
[19] Yi Luan, Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2017. Scientific Information Extraction with Semi-supervised Neural Tagging. In Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Martha Palmer,
Rebecca Hwa, and Sebastian Riedel (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2641–2651. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1279
[20] Zakariae Alami Merrouni, Bouchra Frikh, and Brahim Ouhbi. 2016. Automatic
keyphrase extraction: An overview of the state of the art. In 2016 4th IEEE
International Colloquium on Information Science and Technology (CiSt) . 306–313.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CIST.2016.7805062
[21] Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2022.
Cross-Task Generalization via Natural Language Crowdsourcing Instructions.
arXiv:2104.08773 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08773
[22] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela
Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language
models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv:2203.02155 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155
[23] Wenjun Peng, Guiyang Li, Yue Jiang, Zilong Wang, Dan Ou, Xiaoyi Zeng, Derong
Xu, Tong Xu, and Enhong Chen. 2024. Large Language Model based Long-tail
Query Rewriting in Taobao Search. arXiv:2311.03758 [cs.IR] https://arxiv.org/
abs/2311.03758
[24] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D.
Manning, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language
Model is Secretly a Reward Model. arXiv:2305.18290 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/
abs/2305.18290
[25] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne
Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro,
Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language Models.
arXiv:2302.13971 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971
[26] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia
Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini,
Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut
Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet,
Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton,
Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva,
Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross
Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov,
Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama
2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. arXiv:2307.09288 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288
[27] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian
Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. 2022. Finetuned Language
Models Are Zero-Shot Learners. arXiv:2109.01652 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/
2109.01652
[28] Di Wu, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2024. Pre-trained Language Models for Keyphrase Generation: A Thorough Empirical Study.
arXiv:2212.10233 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10233
[29] Shusheng Xu, Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Wenjie Ye, Weilin Liu, Zhiyu Mei, Guangju
Wang, Chao Yu, and Yi Wu. 2024. Is DPO Superior to PPO for LLM Alignment? A
Comprehensive Study. arXiv:2404.10719 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10719
[30] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Guanting Dong, Haoran Wei,
Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jialin Wang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
Jianxin Ma, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, Jinze Bai, Jinzheng He, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang,
Keming Lu, Keqin Chen, Kexin Yang, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Na Ni, Pei Zhang,
Peng Wang, Ru Peng, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Runji Lin, Shijie Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan
Tan, Tianhang Zhu, Tianhao Li, Tianyu Liu, Wenbin Ge, Xiaodong Deng, Xiaohuan Zhou, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Zhang, Xipin Wei, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan,
Yang Yao, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yunfei Chu, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru
Zhang, and Zhihao Fan. 2024. Qwen2 Technical Report. arXiv:2407.10671 [cs.CL]

[PAGE 10]
Conference’25, April 2025, Sydney, Australia S Ren et al.
Table 8: An example of preference data. Our data is mainly
in Chinese, the first line of the table is the original data.
The English translation is provided in the second line. The
content of question is constructed by combining the textual
information from several semantically similar items. Thus
there are enough keywords candidates for ordering, which
ones are partially better than others. The first one in answer
is supposed to be better than the second one for similar item
exploration according to the feedback of our search system.
The preferred query candidates are highlighted in red, while
the dispreferred ones are highlighted in blue.
{ "question": " 违规信息如下：亚马逊猛鱼，鲳鱼 ，吃食嘎嘎
猛。看上私聊发吃食视频 食 人鱼 红腹水虎,猛鱼嘎嘎 猛，
都是12CM以上 ，如果去网上买 就要问老板能不能保证是三
角锯齿，不然就是假货感兴趣的话点我想要和我私聊吧,猛鱼
水hu小苗8公分左右。新手入门级P属性群体鱼 感兴趣的话
点我想要和我私聊吧,红腹20多条，10公分左右，先到先得，
不发货只能自提。感兴趣的话点我想要和我私聊吧,红腹水
虎，15cm左右，青海民族大学自提，两条80元 感兴趣的话点
我想要和我私聊吧,红腹食人鱼 十厘米左右 食人鲳！感兴趣的
话点我想要和我私聊吧",
"answer": [
"提取的关键词集合如下，以英文逗号分隔：红腹,红腹水虎,腹
水虎",
"提取的关键词集合如下，以英文逗号分隔：猛鱼水hu,红腹食
人鱼,锯齿"
],
"system": "你是一个内容安全专家，需要从违规商品信息中提
取出有助排查相似风险的关键词，关注和违规相关的独特信
息。"
}
{ "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Amazon Fish, Pomfret, aggressive eaters. If you’re interested, send me
a private message for feeding videos. Piranhas, Red-bellied Water
Tiger, all are over 12CM. If buying online, make sure to ask the
seller if they can guarantee it’s a triangular serration; otherwise,
it’s a counterfeit. If you’re interested, click me to chat privately.
Fierce water taiger Seedlings, approximately 8 cm. Beginner-level P
attribute group fish. If you’re interested, click to chat with me. 20+
Red-bellied Fish, Approximately 10 cm - First Come, First Served,
Local Pickup Only. If you’re interested, click me to chat privately.
Red-Bellied Water Tiger, Approximately 15cm, Self-Pickup at Qinghai Minzu University, 80 Yuan for Two. If you’re interested, click
me to chat privately. Red-Bellied Piranha - Approximately 10 cm Piranha Fish! If you’re interested, click me to chat privately. ",
"answer": [
"The collection of the extracted keywords for risk exploration is
as follows, separated by commas: Red-bellied,Red-bellied Water
Tiger,bellied Water Tiger",
"The collection of the extracted keywords for risk exploration is
as follows, separated by commas: Fierce water taiger,Red-Bellied
Piranha,serration"
],
"system": "You are a content safety expert and need to extract key
words from the improper item’s information to help detect more
similar risks, focusing on the unique information related to the
violations. "
}
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10671
[31] Qi Zhang, Yang Wang, Yeyun Gong, and Xuanjing Huang. 2016. Keyphrase
Extraction Using Deep Recurrent Neural Networks on Twitter. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Jian Su,
Kevin Duh, and Xavier Carreras (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Austin, Texas, 836–845. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D16-1080
[32] Lin Zhao, Longtao Huang, Liangjun Zang, Jizhong Han, and Songlin Hu. 2019.
LMLSTM:Extract Event-Oriented Keyphrase From News Stream. In 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) . 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/
IJCNN.2019.8852151
[33] Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan Ye, Zheyan Luo, Zhangchi
Feng, and Yongqiang Ma. 2024. LlamaFactory: Unified Efficient Fine-Tuning of
100+ Language Models. arXiv:2403.13372 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.
A Data Examples
A sample from our preference alignment dataset is shown in table
8.

[TABLE page=10 index=1]
Columns: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce AmaRow 1: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: zon Fish, Pomfret, aggressive eaters. If you’re interested, send me
Row 2: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: a private message for feeding videos. Piranhas, Red-bellied Water
Row 3: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: Tiger, all are over 12CM. If buying online, make sure to ask the
Row 4: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: seller if they can guarantee it’s a triangular serration; otherwise,
Row 5: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: it’s a counterfeit. If you’re interested, click me to chat privately.
Row 6: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: Fierce water taiger Seedlings, approximately 8 cm. Beginner-level P
Row 7: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: attribute group fish. If you’re interested, click to chat with me. 20+
Row 8: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: Red-bellied Fish, Approximately 10 cm - First Come, First Served,
Row 9: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: Local Pickup Only. If you’re interested, click me to chat privately.
Row 10: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: Red-Bellied Water Tiger, Approximately 15cm, Self-Pickup at QingRow 11: { "question": "The improper information is as follows: Fierce Ama-: hai Minzu University, 80 Yuan for Two. If you’re interested, click
[/TABLE]