[PAGE 1]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
Large Language Models Don’t Make Sense of Word Problems.
A Scoping Review from a Mathematics Education Perspective

Anselm R. Strohmaier1*, Wim Van Dooren2, Kathrin Seßler3, Brian Greer4, Lieven Verschaffel2

1 University of Education Freiburg, Institute for Mathematics Education
2 KU Leuven, Centre for Instructional Psychology and Technology
3 Technical University of Munich, Department of Educational Sciences
4 Portland State University

*Address correspondence to: anselm.strohmaier@ph-freiburg.de

Abstract
The progress of Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT raises the question of how they can be integrated into
education. One hope is that they can support mathematics learning, including word -problem solving. Since LLMs can
handle textual input with ease, they appear well -suited for solving mathematical word problems. Yet their real
competence, whether they can make sense of the real -world context , and the implications for classrooms remain
unclear.
We conducted a scoping review from a mathematics-education perspective, including three parts: a technical overview,
a systematic review of word problems used in research, and a state -of-the-art empirical evaluation of LLMs on
mathematical word problems.
First, in the technical overview, we contrast the conceptualization of word problems and their solution processes
between LLMs and students. In computer -science research this is typically labeled mathematical reasoning, a term that
does not align with usage in mathematics education. Second, our literature review of 213 studies shows that the most
popular word-problem corpora are dominated by s-problems, which do not require a consideration of realities of their
real-world context. Finally, our evaluation of GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4.1, o3, and GPT-5 on 287 word problems
shows that most recent LLMs solve these s -problems with near -perfect accuracy, including a perfect score on 2 0
problems from PISA. LLMs still showed weaknesses in tackling problems where the real-world context is problematic or
non-sensical.
In sum, we argue based on all three aspects that LLMs have mastered a superficial solution process but do not make
sense of word problems, which potentially limits their value as instructional tools in mathematics classrooms.

Keywords
LLM; word-problem solving; AI; mathematical reasoning; modelling

1 Introduction
In the last couple of years, the rapid improvement of
Large Language Models (LLMs) has led to an
unprecedented interest in educational research in
artificial intelligence in general, and of LLMs in particular
(Kasneci et al., 2023) . However, while LLMs excel at
producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not
natively designed for processing numerical information,
calculating, or proving (Chang et al., 2024). Compared to
other tasks, solving mathematical problems is relatively
difficult for LLMs (Testolin, 2024).
This is also true for mathematical word -problems
solving. The number of studies evaluating LLMs
performance on word problems is large, and several
survey and review papers have recently summarized the
performance of LLMs in solving word problems (Plaat et
al., 2024; see also Ahn et al., 2024; Lai et al., 2024; Liu et
al., 2024; Lu et al., 2023; Saraf et al., 2024; Sundaram et
al., 2024; Testolin, 2024).

However, both the original studies as well as the se
surveys hold almost exclusively a computer science
perspective and focus on LLM features and performance
gains, rather than relating performance and solution
processes to that of humans. Moreover, due to differing
practices in how and where these studies are published,
the terminology they use, and in the level of required
technical knowledge to fully comprehend them, they are
often not easily accessible to the mathematics education
community.
From a mathematics education perspective, we don’t
really know which types of word problems LLMs can
solve, and which word problems they still struggle with.
Moreover, while we have some knowledge about LLMs
performance, there exists no comprehensive discussion
of how the process of word -problem solving differs
between LLMs and students. Therefore, it is unclear what
the capabilities of LLMs are and how useful they are in a

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not | practices in how and where these studies are published,
Row 1: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: natively designed for processing numerical information, | practices in how and where these studies are published,: the terminology they use, and in the level of required
Row 2: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: calculating, or proving (Chang et al., 2024). Compared to | practices in how and where these studies are published,: technical knowledge to fully comprehend them, they are
Row 3: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: other tasks, solving mathematical problems is relatively | practices in how and where these studies are published,: often not easily accessible to the mathematics education
Row 4: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: difficult for LLMs (Testolin, 2024). | practices in how and where these studies are published,: community.
Row 5: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: This is also true for mathematical word-problems | practices in how and where these studies are published,: From a mathematics education perspective, we don’t
Row 6: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: solving. The number of studies evaluating LLMs | practices in how and where these studies are published,: really know which types of word problems LLMs can
Row 7: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: performance on word problems is large, and several | practices in how and where these studies are published,: solve, and which word problems they still struggle with.
Row 8: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: survey and review papers have recently summarized the | practices in how and where these studies are published,: Moreover, while we have some knowledge about LLMs
Row 9: producing, translating and reviewing text, they are not: performance of LLMs in solving word problems (Plaat et | practices in how and where these studies are published,: performance, there exists no comprehensive discussion
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
mathematics classroom . To address these gaps, this
study provides a scoping review. It is structured in three
parts, each addressing one research goal:
Part A – Conceptual foundations: We clarify from a
theoretical perspective what mathematical word
problems are and compare how they are solved by
students and by LLMs. The goal is to lay the theoretical
groundwork and to highlight similarities and differences
in students’ and LLM’s word-problem solving.
Part B – Word-problem landscape: We provide a
systematic overview of which word problems have been
used in existing research on LLMs and how LLMs
performance on these problems was, with the goal to
investigate how these word problems align with
mathematics education.
Part C – Performance analysis: We conduct our own
analyses on fi ve recent LLMs on the most used word problem sets from computer science research, and two
sets of typical and critical examples of word problems
from mathematics education research. The goal is to
gain a comparable and state-of-the-art understanding of
the capabilities and limitations of LLMs.
Finally, we integrate these parts in a joint discussion.

2 Part A – Conceptual foundations: How do
Students and Large Language Models Solve
Word Problems?
2.1 Students’ Word-Problem Solving
Mathematical word problems are “verbal descriptions of
problem situations wherein one or more questions are
raised the answer to which can be obtained by the
application of mathematical operations to numerical
data available in the problem situation” (Verschaffel et
al., 2000, p. ix). This definition is quite broad, and a sharp
division between word problems and other kinds of
mathematical problems is neither possible nor helpful
(Verschaffel et al., 2020) . However, two key features of
word problems are typ ical: a) the problem description
includes natural language b) the problem is embedded
in a real-world context. Thus, in mathematics education,
word problems can be clearly distinguished from
symbolic problems, which use mathematical symbols
instead of natu ral language, or intra -mathematical
problems, which are not embedded in a real -world
context.
In most models of word -problem solving students are
assumed to (i) build a situation model from the text and
then (ii) translate it into a mathematical model for solution
(Blum & Niss, 1991; Jaffe & Bolger, 2023; Kintsch &
Greeno, 1985; Mayer et al., 1984; Reusser, 1990;
Verschaffel et al., 2000). Thus, the solution process
includes a translation from natural language to
mathematics followed by mathematical analysis (Fig. 1).

Students struggle most with shifting across three
representations—text, situation model, mathematical
model—and with identifying the relevant information
and inferring an appropriate underlying mathematical
structure (Daroczy et al., 2015; Leiss et al., 2019) . As a
shortcut, students might suspend the connection
between the problem and the real world and skip
building the situation model. By applying the “rules of the
game” of word-problem solving (Verschaffel et al., 2000)
they directly transform the numer ical information and
keywords into a mathematical equation , which is also
referred to as direct translation (Hegarty et al., 1992;
Paige & Simon, 1966).
Such shortcuts often succeed in s -problems ( standard
problems), which are problems that can be solved by a
straightforward application of one or more arithmetic
operations with the given numbers (Verschaffel et al.,
1994). However, they fail at p -problems ( problematic
problems), in which the realities of the problem context
need to be taken into account in order to find an
appropriate mathematical model (Verschaffel et al.,
1994).
An example of a p-problem is: “Steve has bought 4 planks
of 2.5 m each. How many planks of 1 m can he get out of
these planks?” (Verschaffel et al., 1994, p. 276). To solve
this problem correctly, it must be considered that two
planks of 0.5 m can usually not be put back together to
form one plank of 1m. This is different to other contexts,
for example, if Steve had bought four containers of water
holding 2.5  l each, he could distribute them into ten 1  l
bottles.
Even more problematic is the non-sensical age of the
captain problem: “There are 26 sheep and 10 goats on a
ship. How old is the captain?” , which was (incorrectly)
solved with 26 + 10 = 36 years or another mathematical
operation with the given numbers by 78% of first- and
second-graders in the original study (IREM, 1980). Even
though students might be perfectly aware that th is
answer makes no sense, they might believe that it is not
necessary for a mathematical problem to make sense
and simply follow what is likely expected in the
mathematics class room, which is to provide numerical
answers problems. Schoenfeld (1991) refers to this as
suspension of sensemaking (see also Carotenuto et al.,
2021; Verschaffel et al., 2000).

Figure 1. Typical and superficial solution process of mathematical
word problems (Verschaffel et al., 2000, p.13)

[PAGE 3]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
2.2. LLMs word-problem solving
At first glance, chatbots such as ChatGPT appear to
behave like humans. However, the underlying process
differs entirely.
2.2.1 What is a word problem for LLMs . The
previous definition of mathematical word problems is
only of limited use when investigating LLMs: Any input
(characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down
into small units, called tokens. This works by identifying
statistically frequent sequences of characters, which are
typically semantic units (e.g., Sennrich et al., 2016). Short
and common words are often a single token, while
longer words might be split up.
Tokenization treats numbers in the same ways as words.
Essentially, this means that LLMs process mathematical
problems expressed in words technically equivalent to
problems expressed in mathematical symbols. LLM can
still recognize the semantic difference between a
mathematical symbol and a word (just like it
differentiates between a verb and a noun), but in
contrast to humans, a word problem is not processed in
a conceptually different way than a symbolic problem.
From an LLMs perspective, every task is a word problem.
Or, since tokens are not represented as words but as
vectors in a high -dimensional semantic space, all word
problems are ultimately linear algebra problems.
Arguably, the term word problem is much less meaningful
and is therefore used much more liberal in computer
science than in mathematics education.
2.2.2 How does word -problem solving work for
LLMs? The previous description of how students solve
word problems is also of limited use when investigating
how LLMs solve them. In this article, we focus on a
specific class of LLMs, which are pre -trained, decoder only transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) . This includes
models like GPT (Radford & Narasimhan, 2018) or LLaMA
(Touvron et al., 2023), and in principle, Gemini (Anil et al.,
2023) and Claude (Anthropic, 2024) . The basic
mechanism by which these LLMs generate an answer is
called autoregressive generation (Fig. 2). When presented
with a natural-language instruction (called a prompt), the
LLM transforms the prompt into a list of tokens,
determines (based on the position and meaning of the
previous tokens and on pre -training data) a probability
distribution for the next token and samples a token
based on this distribution. The probability distribution is
fully deterministic, but the sampling provides variety in
the output , creating more natural sounding texts. The
chosen token is then appended to the token list, step-bystep generating a text. This process repeats until either a
predetermined token maximum is reached or until the
end-of-sequence token is generated, which simply stops
the process.
Consequently, when given the problem “three plus two
is …” the model does not calculate 3 + 2 = 5; it has merely
learned during training that the sequence “three plus
two is” is most often followed by “five”. If “plus” was
substituted with “minus”, this would change the
probability distribution for the next token: “Five” would
become unlikely, while “one” would now have a higher
probability.

Figure 2. Autoregressive generation during the solution of a word
problem. The figure shows the actual probability distributions for the
next three tokens during an answer of GPT-3.5-turbo. \n is a new line,
<|end|> is the end-of-sequence token. To provoke the error, this
analysis was run on the older snapshot GPT-3.5-turbo-1106, released
in November 2023. More recent models (e.g., GPT -4o-mini) solve this
problem correctly.

In addition to autoregressive generation, some recent
models like GPT -4o also incorporate process
optimization strategies like multi -step reasoning,
internal memory, or self -evaluation to improve their
performance on complex tasks. They can also include
external tools such as a calculator or a programming
environment. These methods can substantially improve
LLMs performance on word problems (Seßler et al.,
2024) and arguably make the solution process more
similar to that of humans: Recursive evaluation
resembles the iterative steps of the modelling cycle
(Blum & Leiss, 2007) , though without a semantic
situation model, and using external tools for calculations
is similar to using a calculator. However, the main
structural difference persists: LLMs will ultimately always
produce text based on trained probabilities on the token
level, and not by building a comprehensive situation
model and deriving a mathematical model from it.
2.2.3 Misconceptions regarding word -problem
solving by LLMs . Since LLMs appear human on the
surface, some misconceptions can arise. First, LLMs
cannot look back on their own process of generating
text. In pure autoregressive generation, the output itself
is the process —there is no hidden layer to analyze.
Asking an LLM “How did you solve this?” simply triggers
another round of autoregressive generation. Second,
LLMs can only learn during pre -training and fine-tuning,
but they are not self-learning systems and do not update
their internal parameters during a conversation – they
merely keep a limited amount of it as part of the prompt.
The pre-trained state of the LLM cannot be altered by the
user. Third, LLMs may seem to understand everyday
situations because they can recite plausible facts, yet
they lack any sense of reality (or direct grounding). What
they “know” is only a statistical echo of their training
data. Humans, by contrast, build world -models through
perception and embodied experience. For instance , we
learn that a balloon can be shared but not cleanly divided

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down | Unnamed: 0
Row 1: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: into small units, called tokens. This works by identifying | Unnamed: 0:
Row 2: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: statistically frequent sequences of characters, which are | Unnamed: 0:
Row 3: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: typically semantic units (e.g., Sennrich et al., 2016). Short | Unnamed: 0:
Row 5: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: and common words are often a single token, while | Unnamed: 0:
Row 6: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: | Unnamed: 0: Figure 2. Autoregressive generation during the solution of a word
Row 7: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: longer words might be split up. | Unnamed: 0: problem. The figure shows the actual probability distributions for the
Row 8: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: Tokenization treats numbers in the same ways as words. | Unnamed: 0: next three tokens during an answer of GPT-3.5-turbo. \n is a new line,
Row 9: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: Essentially, this means that LLMs process mathematical | Unnamed: 0: <|end|> is the end-of-sequence token. To provoke the error, this
Row 10: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: | Unnamed: 0: analysis was run on the older snapshot GPT-3.5-turbo-1106, released
Row 11: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: problems expressed in words technically equivalent to | Unnamed: 0:
Row 12: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: | Unnamed: 0: in November 2023. More recent models (e.g., GPT-4o-mini) solve this
Row 13: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: problems expressed in mathematical symbols. LLM can | Unnamed: 0: problem correctly.
Row 14: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: still recognize the semantic difference between a | Unnamed: 0:
Row 15: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: mathematical symbol and a word (just like it | Unnamed: 0: In addition to autoregressive generation, some recent
Row 16: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: differentiates between a verb and a noun), but in | Unnamed: 0: models like GPT-4o also incorporate process
Row 17: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: contrast to humans, a word problem is not processed in | Unnamed: 0: optimization strategies like multi-step reasoning,
Row 18: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: a conceptually different way than a symbolic problem. | Unnamed: 0: internal memory, or self-evaluation to improve their
Row 19: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: From an LLMs perspective, every task is a word problem. | Unnamed: 0: performance on complex tasks. They can also include
Row 20: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: Or, since tokens are not represented as words but as | Unnamed: 0: external tools such as a calculator or a programming
Row 21: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: vectors in a high-dimensional semantic space, all word | Unnamed: 0: environment. These methods can substantially improve
Row 22: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: problems are ultimately linear algebra problems. | Unnamed: 0: LLMs performance on word problems (Seßler et al.,
Row 23: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: Arguably, the term word problem is much less meaningful | Unnamed: 0: 2024) and arguably make the solution process more
Row 24: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: and is therefore used much more liberal in computer | Unnamed: 0: similar to that of humans: Recursive evaluation
Row 25: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: science than in mathematics education. | Unnamed: 0: resembles the iterative steps of the modelling cycle
Row 26: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: 2.2.2 How does word-problem solving work for | Unnamed: 0: (Blum & Leiss, 2007), though without a semantic
Row 27: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: LLMs? The previous description of how students solve | Unnamed: 0: situation model, and using external tools for calculations
Row 28: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: word problems is also of limited use when investigating | Unnamed: 0: is similar to using a calculator. However, the main
Row 29: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: how LLMs solve them. In this article, we focus on a | Unnamed: 0: structural difference persists: LLMs will ultimately always
Row 30: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: specific class of LLMs, which are pre-trained, decoder- | Unnamed: 0: produce text based on trained probabilities on the token
Row 31: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: only transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). This includes | Unnamed: 0: level, and not by building a comprehensive situation
Row 32: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: models like GPT (Radford & Narasimhan, 2018) or LLaMA | Unnamed: 0: model and deriving a mathematical model from it.
Row 33: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: (Touvron et al., 2023), and in principle, Gemini (Anil et al., | Unnamed: 0: 2.2.3 Misconceptions regarding word-problem
Row 34: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: 2023) and Claude (Anthropic, 2024). The basic | Unnamed: 0: solving by LLMs. Since LLMs appear human on the
Row 35: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: mechanism by which these LLMs generate an answer is | Unnamed: 0: surface, some misconceptions can arise. First, LLMs
Row 36: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: called autoregressive generation (Fig. 2). When presented | Unnamed: 0: cannot look back on their own process of generating
Row 37: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: with a natural-language instruction (called a prompt), the | Unnamed: 0: text. In pure autoregressive generation, the output itself
Row 38: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: LLM transforms the prompt into a list of tokens, | Unnamed: 0: is the process—there is no hidden layer to analyze.
Row 39: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: determines (based on the position and meaning of the | Unnamed: 0: Asking an LLM “How did you solve this?” simply triggers
Row 40: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: previous tokens and on pre-training data) a probability | Unnamed: 0: another round of autoregressive generation. Second,
Row 41: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: distribution for the next token and samples a token | Unnamed: 0: LLMs can only learn during pre-training and fine-tuning,
Row 42: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: based on this distribution. The probability distribution is | Unnamed: 0: but they are not self-learning systems and do not update
Row 43: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: fully deterministic, but the sampling provides variety in | Unnamed: 0: their internal parameters during a conversation – they
Row 44: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: the output, creating more natural sounding texts. The | Unnamed: 0: merely keep a limited amount of it as part of the prompt.
Row 45: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: chosen token is then appended to the token list, step-by- | Unnamed: 0: The pre-trained state of the LLM cannot be altered by the
Row 46: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: step generating a text. This process repeats until either a | Unnamed: 0: user. Third, LLMs may seem to understand everyday
Row 47: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: predetermined token maximum is reached or until the | Unnamed: 0: situations because they can recite plausible facts, yet
Row 48: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: end-of-sequence token is generated, which simply stops | Unnamed: 0: they lack any sense of reality (or direct grounding). What
Row 49: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: the process. | Unnamed: 0: they “know” is only a statistical echo of their training
Row 50: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: Consequently, when given the problem “three plus two | Unnamed: 0: data. Humans, by contrast, build world-models through
Row 51: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: is ...” the model does not calculate 3 + 2 = 5; it has merely | Unnamed: 0: perception and embodied experience. For instance, we
Row 52: (characters or numbers) given to an LLM is first cut down: learned during training that the sequence “three plus | Unnamed: 0: learn that a balloon can be shared but not cleanly divided
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
by watching one pop when someone tries —whereas a
language model infers this only from the sparse co occurrence patterns of “balloon” and “divide” in its
training data.

3 Part B – Word-Problem Landscape: Which word
problems are used in research on LLMs word problem solving?
For our second research goal, we systematically
investigated which sets of word problems, referred to as
word-problem corpora , were used in studies that
investigated LLM performance on word-problem solving.
In computer science, these corpora are typically
identified by abbreviations or acronyms and are usually
called benchmarks. For example, GSM8k ( Cobbe et al.,
2021) is a collection of 8500 (hence 8k) grade-school
mathematics (GSM) word problems.
3.1 Methods (Part B)
We conducted a systematic literature search based on
the PRISM statement (Moher et al., 2009) . In the first
step, we did a database search on SCOPUS 1, including
published articles as well as preprints. Our search string
included a) variants of the term mathematical
performance and b) variants of the term LLM2. The search
was conducted on January 26 th, 2025, and included all
publications up to 2024, resulting in 428 published
papers and 633 preprints3. These 1061 papers were then
screened in two rounds based on the following inclusion
criteria: a) the paper investigated the performance of
LLMs; b) the paper used mathematical tasks to evaluate
performance; c) the primary research goal was to
evaluate mathematical performance. We excluded paper
that a) assessed mathematical theorem proving; b) did
not use their own data, e.g., survey papers and
systematic literature reviews.
The first round of screening was done automatically by
prompting GPT-4o-mini to evaluate each abstract based
on the criteria ten times independently. Papers which
were excluded during all ten repetitions (383 papers)
were excluded without further evaluation.
The remaining 678 papers were screened manually by
the first author based on the same criteria, which led to
the exclusion of 274 additional studies and 90 duplicates.
For the resulting 314 studies, full texts were obtained,
and it was coded by the first author which problem
corpora were used in the study. 96 studies were
subsequently excluded because they only used problem
corpora that were not mathematical word problems in
the sense of our definition, i.e., they were purely
symbolic or exclusively in an intra-mathematical context.
Finally, 213 studies remained. In addition, we coded the
publication year and whether the study was published as

1 We only used SCOPUS as this was the only available database
which also includes preprints.
2 Not including multimodal or visual models.
3 In many cases, preprints had consecutively been published as
papers. These duplicates were only removed during the coding
a journal article, in conference proceedings, or as a
preprint4.
3.2 Results (Part B)
Of the 213 papers, 10 had been published as a journal
article by the time of the search, 67 had been published
as conference proceedings, and 136 were preprints. 4
studies were published in 2022, 39 were published in
2023, and 170 were published in 2024. There were no
studies published prior to 2022.
Figure 3 shows the number of studies in which each
corpus was used. It was very common that studies used
several corpora ( M = 2.2). Overall, 84 different corpora
were used.

Figure 3. Frequencies of the word-problem corpora

3.3 Notable Examples
Due to the limited space, we will not discuss each of the
corpora but limit ourselves to the most relevant
examples. For all presented corpora, we include one
example problem in Appendix A.
3.3.1 The early challenges: MAWPS, ASDiv, and
SVAMP. One of the oldest corpora for evaluating LLMs is
MAWPS (short for Math Word Problems , used in 15
studies; Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016) , which is a
collection of word problems from different previously
published sources. Problems range from simple
arithmetic to systems of two linear equations and are
embedded in a real -world context. The corpus includes
3320 problems. Many studies also used one or several of
the subsets of MAWPS, e.g., MultiAr ith, SingleEQ, or
AddSub.
Although MAWPS covers a range of problem types, the
structure of these problems is often quite predictable.
Since AI excel at recognizing and exploiting patterns, this
was considered problematic even before LLMs broke
through (e.g., Zheng et al., 2022) . In reaction, ASDiv
(Academia Sinica Diverse MWP Dataset, used in 24 studies;
process, since they were not always clearly distinguishable by author
names and titles alone.
4 For duplicates, we discarded the preprint, or in case of journal
articles and proceedings, the proceedings.

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: The remaining 678 papers were screened manually by | published sources. | Problems | range | from | simple
Row 1: The remaining 678 papers were screened manually by: the first author based on the same criteria, which led to | published sources.: arithmetic to systems of two linear equations and are | Problems: | range: | from: | simple:
Row 2: The remaining 678 papers were screened manually by: the exclusion of 274 additional studies and 90 duplicates. | published sources.: embedded in a real-world context. The corpus includes | Problems: | range: | from: | simple:
Row 3: The remaining 678 papers were screened manually by: For the resulting 314 studies, full texts were obtained, | published sources.: 3320 problems. Many studies also used one or several of | Problems: | range: | from: | simple:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
Zheng et al., 2022) emerged as one of the most popular
alternatives to MAWPS, putting a focus on providing
more diverse linguistic structures. SVAMP ( Simple
Variations on Arithmetic Math Word Problems , used in 64
studies; Patel et al., 2021) is a variant of ASDiv with
increased difficulty. It is the most popular ancestor of
MAWPS today . SVAMP was motivated by analyses of
MAWPS and ASDiv which showed that even when the
question was removed, AI models still gave a correct
answer to 60%-80% of all problems , illustrating their
predictive and transparent structure (Patel et al., 2021).
Even though all these corpora include problems that we
consider s-problems, they provided a hard challenge for
AI models at the time of their release, not nearly
achieving the same performance as humans. However,
GPT-3 already achieved a baseline average s olution rate
(without any further prompting) of 73% (MAWPS), 70%
(ASDiv) and 66% (SVAMP) (Wei et al., 2022), necessitating
the creation of more challenging corpora.
3.3.2 Most popular today: GSM8k. GSM8k (Cobbe
et al., 2021) , was used in 146 of the 213 studies we
included. It was published by a group of researchers
from OpenAI. In the publication, four goals were
formulated, which should address some of the issues
with previous corpora: (1) The tasks should not contain
errors, (2) the tasks should be linguistically diverse, so
that it is not possible to s olve them by identifying a
template, and (3) the tasks should be of moderate
difficulty, which in this case is described as “a bright
middle school student should be able to solve every
problem” (p. 3).
The increase in difficulty compared to earlier corpora
was mostly achieved by an increase in required solution
steps: GSM8k requires between 2 and 8 steps to solve,
but all steps are basic arithmetic operations. From a
mathematics education perspective these problems are
still s-problems.
GSM8k was, at the time of its publication, quite
challenging for LLMs—GPT-3’s baseline average solution
rate was 16% (Wei et al., 2022) and it was described as
“useful for probing the informal reasoning ability of large
language models.” (Cobbe et al., 2021, p.2). This suggest
that GSM8k was primarily created as a playground for
training and testing the abilities of LLMs.
3.3.3 Variants to make GSM8k more challenging
GSM8k was a common starting point for other studies to
create variant corpora for specific research questions.
However, these studies mainly addressed the challenges
and shortcomings of LLMs instead of increasing the
difficulty that is interesting from a m athematics
education perspective. For example, in GSM-hard (Gao et
al., 2023 ; used in 13 studies) problem difficulty was
increased by using larger numbers in the original
problems, decreasing the solution rate for a GPT -3
variant from 19.7% to 5.0%. In GSM8k-Scheherazade
(Miner et al., 2024; used in one study), up to 10 problems
from GSM8k were nested, such that the quantities in one
problem depended on the answer of the previous. As the
context in these problems is almost never related, this
resulted in quite comical (and non -sensical) problems,
and decreased performance of GPT-4o from 97% to 50%
for chains of length 10. In E-GSM (Xu et al., 2024; used in
one study) solution rates for GPT -4o-mini decreased
from around 93% to around 80% due to lengthy
descriptions of the irrelevant context.
But there are also corpora that that decrease LLMs
performance by increasing the relevance of the context,
creating p -problems: In GSM -IC, irrelevant numerical
information was added (Shi et al., 2023 ; used in seven
studies, 80% on a GPT-3 variant), in UMP the real -world
context was changed so that the question was
unrealistic, but still solvable (Ma et al., 2024; used in one
study, 64% on GTP -4o). NUMGlue combined
mathematical problems with common sense, real -world
knowledge, and reading comprehension (Mishra et al.,
2022; used in five studies, 5% on GPT-3).
3.3.4 Word-problem corpora from mathematics
education research . While most computer science
corpora sets are collections of school textbook problems
or are themselves generated by LLMs , we found only
three studies that instead reused classic tasks from
mathematics education literature —problems originally
designed to probe how humans, not AI, solve word
problems: Spreitzer et al. (2024) used five canonic
modelling tasks (e.g., from Blum & Leiß, 2005) to
investigate how LLMs perform in various subprocesses
of mathematical modelling. They did not investigate
solution rates systematically, but their results indicate
that GPT-4.0 was able to solve most problems correctly.
Schorcht et al. (2024) compared prompting techniques
for mathematical problem solving, using three classical
problem-based tasks in natural language (e.g., from
Pólya, 1945) . Similarly to Spreitzer et al . ( 2024), the
authors did not focus on solution rates. However, they
reported that LLMs solution rate was around 30% for
GPT-4 and 10% for GPT-3.5 for the two harder problems.
Krohling, (2023) evaluated an unknown version of
ChatGPT with Bayesian reasoning problems, which were
consistently solved correctly by the LLM.

4 Part C – Performance analysis: What is the
current state of LLM’s performance in word problem solving?
Even though the sets of tasks that were presented in the
last section have been used in numerous studies, there
are only little data on the state-of-the art performance of
LLMs on these word problems, and no data that allows
for a systematic comparison across models and corpora.
This has several reasons. The first and most obvious is
the rapid development of LLMs – a study that was
conducted even only months ago will already be
outdated. Second, since many different LLMs are
available, it is hard to disenta ngle the performance of a
specific model from the difficulty of a specific corpus .

[PAGE 6]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
Third, most studies use elaborate prompting techniques
even for their baseline performances, with prompts
often including worked examples of the same problem
type. This few-shot prompting increases performance but
does arguably not reflect a typical educational setting
where teachers or students rely on models that are
readily available , or where no worked example exists .
Finally, most studies use automatic processes (typically
utilizing LLMs) to code answers as correct or incorrect
based on a numerical com parison, without considering
the whole answer (Mondorf & Plank, 2024) . This
approach is necessary for large amounts of data, but it
often limits information on the solution process.
To address these limitations, the final section reports our
own evaluation: we tested five recent LLMs on four wordproblem corpora without prompting and with answers
coded manually.
4.1 Methods (Part C)
4.1.1 Word-problem corpora We used a random
selection of 100 word problems 5 each from GSM8k
(Cobbe et al., 2021) and SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021) ,
respectively. These corpora were used since they were
the most common in our analysis in Part B . The third
corpus was a collection of word problems that were
typical for mathematics education research: For this, we
used the five modeling word problems from Spreitzer et
al. (2024), the three problem-based word problems from
Schorcht et al. (2024), and a collection of 20 word
problems from PISA (OECD, 2006, 2013)6. Because of the
high risk that the published PISA -problems were
included in the training data for the LLMs, we also
constructed 20 parallel word problems based on the
same mathematical core but embedded in a different
context. This led to a total of 48 problems. The fourth
corpus comprised classical p-problems from four studies
on sensemaking in word -problem solving (IREM, 1980;
Greer, 1993; Verschaffel & De Corte, 1997; Verschaffel et
al., 1994) . Overall, this corpus consisted of 39 word
problems.
To investigate how LLMs handle different types of word
problems, we distinguished between s -problems and
three types of p -problems (see Tab. 2, for examples):
Contextual problems required real -world knowledge or
assumptions to be solved correctly. These problems
could be approached using the given information, but
this would lead to an unrealistic answer. Weird problems
provided all relevant information and could be solved
correctly without considering the context, but the
context was unrealistic. Finally, non-sensical problems
were problems with missing information or an
impossible context, making them impossible to solve
meaningfully with the given information.

5 The random selection was done for cost reduction.
6 The 20 PISA word problems contained all published items in purely
textual form that had also previously been used in a PISA main
Initially, we expected all problems from GSM8k, SVAMP
and our mathematics education corpus to be s problems. However, during closer inspection, it turned
out that of the 100 randomly selected problems from
SVAMP, 9 were non-sensical problems and 17 were weird
problems. For GSM8k, two problems were contextual,
and three were weird (see Tab. 3).

Table 2. Task Types
Task Type Example Source
Standard If you had 4 bags with equal number of
cookies and 36 cookies in total How many
cookies does each bag have?
SVAMP; (Patel et
al., 2021)
Contextual Steve has bought 5 planks each 2,5 meters
long. How many planks 1 meter long can he
saw from these planks?
(Verschaffel et
al., 1994)
Weird There are 27 unicorns left in the world. One
third of them are in the Scottish Highlands.
Two thirds of the Scottish unicorns are
female. How many female Scottish unicorns
are there?
GSM8k;
(Cobbe et al.,
2021)
Non-Sensical There are 26 sheep and 10 goats on a ship.
How old is the captain?
(IREM, 1980)

Table 3. Characteristics of task sets in the different sources
Problem Types
Task Set Sources Size Standar
d
Context
ual
Weird Nonsensical
SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021) 100 74 0 17 9
GSM8k (Cobbe et al.,
2021)
100 95 2 3 0
Mathematics
Education
(OECD, 2006,
2013; Schorcht et
al., 2024; Spreitzer
et al., 2024)
48 43 5 0 0
Classical
p-problems
(IREM, 1980;
Greer, 1993;
Verschaffel & De
Corte, 1997;
Verschaffel et al.,
1994)
39 1 20 0 18

4.1.2 LLMs. We used five models for our evaluation.
For simplicity, all fi ve were from OpenAI: GPT 3.5 turbo
(OpenAI, 2023), which is the oldest models still available
as a baseline comparison, GPT 4o -mini (OpenAI, 2024a),
which is the OpenAI model that is currently most
affordable, as well as GPT 4.1 (OpenAI, 2025a) and o3
(OpenAI, 2025b) , which were ( as of June 2025) the
flagship models of OpenAI. After its release in August of
2025, we added as a fifth model (OpenAI, 2025c) .
Although the specific technical details of the models are
not fully public, GPT -4.1 is described as a more
traditional chatbot based primarily on autore gressive
generation, while o3 and GPT -5 are reasoning model s
that include several steps of reflections and chain -ofthought reasoning.
4.1.3 Setup . We used the official openai Python
package (OpenAI, 2024b), which communicates with the
OpenAI API to submit word problems and receives
model-generated completions automatically. Each task
study. Even though recent LLMs are capable to solve tabular or
graphical problems, we limited the selection to purely textual
problems for consistency.

[TABLE page=6 index=1]
Columns: Third, most studies use elaborate prompting techniques | Initially, we expected all problems from GSM8k, SVAMP
Row 1: Third, most studies use elaborate prompting techniques: even for their baseline performances, with prompts | Initially, we expected all problems from GSM8k, SVAMP: and our mathematics education corpus to be sRow 2: Third, most studies use elaborate prompting techniques: often including worked examples of the same problem | Initially, we expected all problems from GSM8k, SVAMP: problems. However, during closer inspection, it turned
Row 3: Third, most studies use elaborate prompting techniques: type. This few-shot prompting increases performance but | Initially, we expected all problems from GSM8k, SVAMP: out that of the 100 randomly selected problems from
Row 4: Third, most studies use elaborate prompting techniques: does arguably not reflect a typical educational setting | Initially, we expected all problems from GSM8k, SVAMP: SVAMP, 9 were non-sensical problems and 17 were weird
Row 5: Third, most studies use elaborate prompting techniques: where teachers or students rely on models that are | Initially, we expected all problems from GSM8k, SVAMP: problems. For GSM8k, two problems were contextual,
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=6 index=2]
Columns: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set | Sources | Unnamed: 0 | Size | Standar | Context | Weird | NonRow 1: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: | Sources: | Unnamed: 0: | Size: | Standar: d | Context: ual | Weird: | Non-: sensical
Row 2: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: corpus was a collection of word problems that were | Sources: | Unnamed: 0: | Size: | Standar: | Context: | Weird: | Non-:
Row 3: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: SVAMP | Sources: (Patel et al., 2021) | Unnamed: 0: | Size: 100.0 | Standar: 74 | Context: 0 | Weird: 17.0 | Non-: 9
Row 4: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: typical for mathematics education research: For this, we GSM8k | Sources: (Cobbe et al., | Unnamed: 0: | Size: 100.0 | Standar: 95 | Context: 2 | Weird: 3.0 | Non-: 0
Row 5: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: | Sources: 2021) | Unnamed: 0: | Size: | Standar: | Context: | Weird: | Non-:
Row 6: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: used the five modeling word problems from Spreitzer et | Sources: | Unnamed: 0: | Size: | Standar: | Context: | Weird: | Non-:
Row 7: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: Mathematics | Sources: (OECD, 2006, | Unnamed: 0: | Size: 48.0 | Standar: 43 | Context: 5 | Weird: 0.0 | Non-: 0
Row 8: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: al. (2024), the three problem-based word problems from Education | Sources: 2013; Schorcht et | Unnamed: 0: | Size: | Standar: | Context: | Weird: | Non-:
Row 9: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: al., 2024; Spreitzer Schorcht et al. (2024), and a collection of 20 word | Sources: | Unnamed: 0: | Size: | Standar: | Context: | Weird: | Non-:
Row 10: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: | Sources: et al., 2024) | Unnamed: 0: | Size: | Standar: | Context: | Weird: | Non-:
Row 11: the most common in our analysis in Part B. The third Task Set: problems from PISA (OECD, 2006, 2013)6. Because of the Classical | Sources: (IREM, 1980; | Unnamed: 0: | Size: 39.0 | Standar: 1 | Context: 20 | Weird: 0.0 | Non-: 18
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 7]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
was submitted only with the system prompt “You’re
solving a mathematical word problem” 7, followed by the
problem text. Each of the 287 word problems were sent
five times per model, resulting in a total of 1435 solutions
per model, or 7175 solutions overall. In cases where no
complete solution was generated due to our initial token
limits (120 cases) , we repeated the request with
increased token limits to gain a complete dataset. For
models with this parameter, temperature was set to 0.7.
For GPT -5, verbosity was set to “low”; reasoning effort
was set to “high”.
4.1.4 Coding. All answers were manually coded by
the first author. 8% of all answers were double coded by
an independent rater to obtain an interrater reliability, κ
= .84. Five answer categories were used (see Tab 4):
Wrong answers were incorrect due to incorrect
numerical data use, choosing of a wrong operation, or
mistakes in calculations. Solved answers were solutions
based on the information given in the word problem. For
s-problems, this is the correct solution, while for p problems, it is wrong. Noticed answers in cluded a hint
that the LLM was aware of the problematic nature of the
word problem but nevertheless solved it with the given
information. Answers were coded as addressed when the
LLM made adaptions to the problem statement or made
assumptions for missing information, considering
aspects of the real-world to solve the problem correctly.
Finally, when LLMs stated in its answer that no
meaningful solution to the problem can be given (with or
without a reason), it was coded as declined8.

Table 4. Example answers for each of the five answer categories.
Answer category Example
Wrong „Since the average height of the boys is 140 cm, it means half
of the boys' heights are below 140 cm, and half are above
140cm.“ (GPT-3.5-turbo)
Solved „ … Number of weeks in the harvest season: 1181 weeks. Total
money saved: 275$ x 1181 = 324 775 $. Lewis will have
$324,775 at the end of the harvest season.“ (o3)
Noticed “… Jill has -3 peaches (which is unusual, but let's continue as
per the math)…” (GPT-4.1)
Addressed “… Once Christmas has passed people stop buying Christmas
cards, so for the three months after December you would
expect the total to be about 0 cards (at most just a handful).”
(o3)
Declined „The captain's age is not directly related to the number of
sheep and goats on the ship. The information provided does
not allow us to determine the captain's age.“ (GPT-3.5-turbo)

4.2 Results (Part C)
4.2.1 By problem type. The performance on sproblems was relatively high for all fi ve models (86% 100%; see Fig. 4). o3 solved all 213 problems of this
category correctly in all five repetitions. For p -problems,
we observed large differences between problem types:
Answers to weird problems were mostly solved or wrong,

7 This prompt was used to reflect the knowledge that students might
typically have when solving mathematical word problems, for
example, in a mathematics classroom or as homework.
without noticing or addressing the unrealistic context. In
contextual problems, the number of addressed answers
increased from GPT -3.5-turbo (47%) to o3 (85%). An
answer to n on-sensical problems was declined in about
one third of all cases across all models. This was mostly
the case in classical age-of-the-captain-type problems, in
which the question was clearly unrelated to the problem.
In more subtle non -sensical problems, the issues were
sometimes noticed (3% for GPT-3.5-turbo to 16% for o3)
and particularly the newer models also addressed the
issues to still provide a correct answer ( 24% for GPT -5).
However, even o3 solved 29% of all non -sensical
problems.
4.2.2 By word -problem corpus . For analyses on
the level of word -problem corpora, we only
distinguished between “acceptable” and “not acceptable”
answers, depending on the problem type (see Tab. 5).

Table 5. Acceptable answers for each problem type (marked with X)
Acceptable answer
Problem type Wrong Solved Noticed Addressed Declined
Standard X
Contextual X
Weird X X X X
Non-sensical X X

Two different patterns were observed (Tab. 6): On the
one hand, the rates of acceptable answers on SVAMP,
GSM8k and the mathematics education corpus were
quite similar: GPT-3.5-turbo solved around 80%, GPT-4omini solved around 90%, and GPT -4.1, o3, and GPT -5
solved around 98% of these problems with acceptable
answers. Notably, o3 gave an acceptable answer in all
240 solution attempts of the 48 mathematics education
word problems, including a perfect score on all PISA problems and PISA-adaptions. On the other hand, all five
models showed clear deficits in the classical p-problems.
The number of acceptable answers increased
substantially from GPT -3.5-turbo (51%) to GPT-5 (80%),
but there is still a notable number of problems where
neither model gives acceptable answers. For example,
this includes the contextual “rope-problem” (Greer 1993;
Appendix A.1), which was only solved correctly once, by
GPT-5.

Table 6. Percentage of acceptable answers by word-problem corpus
and LLM
Word-problem corpus
LLM SVAMP GSM8k
Mathematics
education
Classical
p-problems
GPT-3.5-turbo 78.6% 82.6% 79.2% 51.3%
GPT-4o-mini 93.2% 95.0% 84.6% 56.9%
GPT-4.1 92.6% 96.8% 99.6% 71.8%
o3 91.6% 98.6% 100.0% 79.5%
GPT-5 92.4% 98.0% 97.9% 80.0%

8 Note that this is different from the LLM not providing an answer,
e.g., due to reaching a token limit set by the user.

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: Unnamed: 0 | Problem type Wrong | Solved | Noticed Addressed | Declined | Unnamed: 1
Row 1: Unnamed: 0: problems, it is wrong. Noticed answers included a hint | Problem type Wrong: Standard | Solved: X | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 2: Unnamed: 0: that the LLM was aware of the problematic nature of the | Problem type Wrong: Contextual | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: X | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 3: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: Weird | Solved: X | Noticed Addressed: X X | Declined: X | Unnamed: 1:
Row 4: Unnamed: 0: word problem but nevertheless solved it with the given | Problem type Wrong: Non-sensical | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: X | Declined: X | Unnamed: 1:
Row 5: Unnamed: 0: information. Answers were coded as addressed when the | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 6: Unnamed: 0: LLM made adaptions to the problem statement or made | Problem type Wrong: Two different patterns were observed (Tab. 6): On the | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 7: Unnamed: 0: assumptions for missing information, considering | Problem type Wrong: one hand, the rates of acceptable answers on SVAMP, | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 8: Unnamed: 0: aspects of the real-world to solve the problem correctly. | Problem type Wrong: GSM8k and the mathematics | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: education corpus | Declined: | Unnamed: 1: were
Row 9: Unnamed: 0: Finally, when LLMs stated in its answer that no | Problem type Wrong: quite similar: GPT-3.5-turbo solved around 80%, GPT-4o- | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 10: Unnamed: 0: meaningful solution to the problem can be given (with or | Problem type Wrong: mini solved around 90%, and GPT-4.1, o3, and GPT-5 | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 11: Unnamed: 0: without a reason), it was coded as declined8. | Problem type Wrong: solved around 98% of these problems with acceptable | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 12: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: answers. Notably, o3 gave an acceptable answer in all | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 13: Unnamed: 0: Table 4. Example answers for each of the five answer categories. | Problem type Wrong: 240 solution attempts of the 48 mathematics education | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 14: Unnamed: 0: Answer category Example | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 15: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: word problems, including a perfect score on all PISA- | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 16: Unnamed: 0: Wrong „Since the average height of the boys is 140 cm, it means half | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 17: Unnamed: 0: of the boys' heights are below 140 cm, and half are above | Problem type Wrong: problems and PISA-adaptions. On the other hand, all five | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 18: Unnamed: 0: 140cm.“ (GPT-3.5-turbo) | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 19: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: models showed clear deficits in the classical p-problems. | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 20: Unnamed: 0: Solved „ ... Number of weeks in the harvest season: 1181 weeks. Total | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 21: Unnamed: 0: money saved: 275$ x 1181 = 324 775 $. Lewis will have | Problem type Wrong: The number of acceptable | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: answers | Declined: increased | Unnamed: 1:
Row 22: Unnamed: 0: $324,775 at the end of the harvest season.“ (o3) | Problem type Wrong: substantially from GPT-3.5-turbo (51%) to GPT-5 (80%), | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 23: Unnamed: 0: Noticed “... Jill has -3 peaches (which is unusual, but let's continue as | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 24: Unnamed: 0: per the math)...” (GPT-4.1) | Problem type Wrong: but there is still a notable number of problems where | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 25: Unnamed: 0: Addressed “... Once Christmas has passed people stop buying Christmas | Problem type Wrong: neither model gives acceptable answers. For example, | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 26: Unnamed: 0: cards, so for the three months after December you would | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 27: Unnamed: 0: expect the total to be about 0 cards (at most just a handful).” | Problem type Wrong: this includes the contextual “rope-problem” (Greer 1993; | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 28: Unnamed: 0: (o3) | Problem type Wrong: Appendix A.1), which was only solved correctly once, by | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 29: Unnamed: 0: Declined „The captain's age is not directly related to the number of | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 30: Unnamed: 0: GPT-5. sheep and goats on the ship. The information provided does | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 31: Unnamed: 0: not allow us to determine the captain's age.“ (GPT-3.5-turbo) | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 32: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: Table 6. Percentage of acceptable answers by word-problem corpus | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 33: Unnamed: 0: 4.2 Results (Part C) | Problem type Wrong: and LLM | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 34: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: Word-problem corpus | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 35: Unnamed: 0: 4.2.1 By problem type. The performance on s- | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: | Declined: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 36: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: | Solved: | Noticed Addressed: Mathematics | Declined: Classical | Unnamed: 1:
Row 37: Unnamed: 0: problems was relatively high for all five models (86%- | Problem type Wrong: LLM SVAMP | Solved: GSM8k | Noticed Addressed: education | Declined: p-problems | Unnamed: 1:
Row 38: Unnamed: 0: 100%; see Fig. 4). o3 solved all 213 problems of this | Problem type Wrong: GPT-3.5-turbo 78.6% | Solved: 82.6% | Noticed Addressed: 79.2% | Declined: 51.3% | Unnamed: 1:
Row 39: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: GPT-4o-mini 93.2% | Solved: 95.0% | Noticed Addressed: 84.6% | Declined: 56.9% | Unnamed: 1:
Row 40: Unnamed: 0: category correctly in all five repetitions. For p-problems, | Problem type Wrong: GPT-4.1 92.6% | Solved: 96.8% | Noticed Addressed: 99.6% | Declined: 71.8% | Unnamed: 1:
Row 41: Unnamed: 0: we observed large differences between problem types: | Problem type Wrong: o3 91.6% | Solved: 98.6% | Noticed Addressed: 100.0% | Declined: 79.5% | Unnamed: 1:
Row 42: Unnamed: 0: | Problem type Wrong: GPT-5 92.4% | Solved: 98.0% | Noticed Addressed: 97.9% | Declined: 80.0% | Unnamed: 1:
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=7 index=2]
Columns: five times per model, resulting in a total of 1435 solutions | answer to non-sensical problems was declined in about
Row 1: five times per model, resulting in a total of 1435 solutions: per model, or 7175 solutions overall. In cases where no | answer to non-sensical problems was declined in about: one third of all cases across all models. This was mostly
Row 2: five times per model, resulting in a total of 1435 solutions: complete solution was generated due to our initial token | answer to non-sensical problems was declined in about: the case in classical age-of-the-captain-type problems, in
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.

Figure 4. Answer categories by word-problem type for five different LLMs
5 Discussion
Potentially, LLMs could be a helpful tool for teaching
word-problem solving in school. For this, it is important
to know what the performance of LLMs on word
problems is, and how their solution process theoretically
relates to that of students. The present scoping review
addressed this gap by integrating three perspectives: (i)
an analysis of the technical mechanisms behind LLMs’
word-problem solving, (ii) a literature review of the wordproblem corpora used in prior studies, and (iii) a state of-the-art performance evaluation of fi ve contemporary
models on different types of word problems. In the
following, we combine these results into key findings.
5.1 LLMs performance is superior in s -problems, but
not in p-problems
S-problems can be solved by a straightforward
application of one or more arithmetic operations with
the given numbers. In these word problems, LLMs
perform exceptionally well. OpenAI’s o3, GPT-5 and GPT4.1 have a near-perfect performance in these problems.
S-problems – especially multistep variants – can still be
very challenging for students. Even though we do not
have our own student data for a direct comparison, it is
safe to say that LLMs have surpassed students’
performance in s -problems by far. For e xample, o ur
selection of word problems from PISA had an average
solution rate of 41% for 15 -year-olds in PISA (OECD,
2014), in contrast to the perfect score by o3.
In contrast, LLMs still make errors when solving p problems, in which the realities of the problem context
need to be considered to find an appropriate
mathematical model. These errors can be further
distinguished by the word -problem type: In contextual
problems which require real-world considerations and
can otherwise not be solved, LLMs were mostly capable
of finding a solution. However, in weird and non-sensical
problems where it appears that all relevant information
is present, LLMs often fell into the trap of using only this
given information instead of checking whether the
problem makes sense. LLMs likely still outperform
students on these challenging problems , but they do
make the same errors and perform worse on p-problems
than on s-problems.
It's important to note that this is a snapshot of the very
recent models. However, in contrast to the speed of
improvements during the last two years, the release of
GPT-5 did not come with any substantial improvement in
performance with regard to our analyses.
At the same time, we haven’t used the models to their
full potential: It seems very likely that if LLMs were
trained of prompted more towards checking and
including these real -world considerations, their
performance in p-problems could be increased (Seßler et
al., 2024).
5.2 LLMs don’t make sense of word problems
Why do LLMs struggle with p -problems, but not with s problems? One explanation lies i n the nature of the
solution process of LLMs. LLMs approach every input –
whether a poem, a riddle, or a word problem – as a string
of tokens. Thus, a word problem is a semantic vector
space of tokens, and word -problem solving is a
probabilistic linear algebra problem. What a LLM does
could be described as directly translating the word
problem into its solution. Thereby, they completely
bypass the construction of a reality -based situation
model and a mathematical model, which mathematics
educators consider the very heart of mathematical
modeling and sense -making. Thus, we argue that LLMs
don’t make sense of word problems. However, i n
contrast to students, LLMs are incredibly effective with
this direct-translation strategy when solving s-problems.
But, like students, this makes them sus ceptible to
problems where sensemaking is essential for an
adequate solution. Here efficiency becomes a liability: if
the problem appears like a standard problem, the model
simply works with what is given without any plausibility
checks of the context. Only when the problem is not
solvable otherwise, the context is included.
Another element of explanation lies in the training: Our
literature review shows that the most common word problem corpora are designed as s -problems. In part,
these corpora are from times when the idea that AI might
be able to solve complex word problems still seemed
unthinkable, and thus, problems were purposefully
designed to be relatively straightforward an d de contextualized (Kushman et al., 2014) . More recent

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: distinguished by the word-problem type: In contextual | simply works with what is given without any plausibility
Row 1: distinguished by the word-problem type: In contextual: problems which require real-world considerations and | simply works with what is given without any plausibility: checks of the context. Only when the problem is not
Row 2: distinguished by the word-problem type: In contextual: can otherwise not be solved, LLMs were mostly capable | simply works with what is given without any plausibility: solvable otherwise, the context is included.
Row 3: distinguished by the word-problem type: In contextual: of finding a solution. However, in weird and non-sensical | simply works with what is given without any plausibility: Another element of explanation lies in the training: Our
Row 4: distinguished by the word-problem type: In contextual: problems where it appears that all relevant information | simply works with what is given without any plausibility: literature review shows that the most common wordRow 5: distinguished by the word-problem type: In contextual: is present, LLMs often fell into the trap of using only this | simply works with what is given without any plausibility: problem corpora are designed as s-problems. In part,
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
corpora however are specifically designed to target the
shortcomings of LLMs to provide a challenging
benchmark, but these shortcomings do not necessarily
coincide with what makes word problems challenging for
students. Moreover, studies from computer educ ation
typically use some form of automatic coding in their
evaluation to allow for a quick and automatized
evaluation of large numbers of answers . This requires
the definition of unambiguous, well-defined and often
numerical model solutions. This trains LLMs in a way that
suggests that finding a specific solution is the goal of
word-problem solving. There are only very few examples
in these datasets which train towards reflecting on the
problem or refusing to give an answer.
Consequently, s-problems with well-defined answers are
most common for LLMs during training, and thus, their
strategies might be particularly optimized for these
problems. In s -problems, LLMs might just don’t need
other skills.
5.4 Theoretical and educational implications
5.4.1 Terminology. In computer science, the term
mathematical reasoning is commonly used to refer to the
solution of any kind of mathematical task (Sundaram et
al., 2024). This is different to mathematics education in
two ways: First, in computer science, the term does not
distinguish between word problems and symbolic
problems. This is reasonable in the context of LLMs,
because both problem types are transformed into
tokens in the same way. Secondly, in mathematics
education the term reasoning is commonly reserved to
activities that require some form of argumentation or
logic (Hjelte et al., 2020). Solving a simple addition word
problem would therefore usually not be considered
reasoning. For LLMs however, the underlying process
behind basic arithmetic and complex logic is the same,
and thus, it is not necessary nor meaningful to make this
distinction.
5.4.2 The word -problem landscape and blind
spots. From a mathematics education perspective, the
landscape of word problems used to evaluate LLMs is
lob-sided towards s-problems. Even though more recent
corpora tried to vary the linguistic structure and the
mathematical operations, the realities of the context are
still usually not relevant for their solution . In
mathematics education, this is often referred to as
“dressed-up” word problems. Such problems used to be
common in mathematics education but nowadays have
often been replaced with more contextually rich
modelling problems (Verschaffel et al., 2020).
The dominance of s -problems is a problem because of
the limited interpretability of many studies in an
educational context, but also because models are pre trained and optimized towards solving such problems.
Many of the decisions in choosing and designing word problem corpora come from the need to provide
comparable, consistent benchmarks to evaluate the
general performance of LLMs. It is not out of a research
interest in human word-problem solving, but in the
capabilities and limits of LLMs. For some corp ora this
converges (e.g., NUMGlue; Mishra et al., 2022) , but for
many it does not. To our knowledge there is no large
word-problem corpus that is specifically curated with the
requirements for genuine mathematical modelling in
focus. Creating such a corpus might be a valuable task
for future research.
5.4.3 Evaluation of LLM solutions in research . In
computer science, word-problem solutions are usually
evaluated automatically, often by using LLMs to compare
the given answer with the correct solution. This self containing process, which often does not involve any
form of human evaluation, is very focused on the
outcome rather than the solution process (Mondorf &
Plank, 2024; Spreitzer et al., 2024) . A more fine -grained
distinction, as we tried to implement in our own manual
evaluation, is more time -consuming, but seems to be
much more informative from a mathematics education
perspective.
5.4.4 Relevance for mathematics classrooms.
LLMs can serve as a tool for providing solutions for s problems. However, their use as a tutor for teaching
word-problem solving is limited by the missing
congruence between their own solution process and the
desired process for students, as well as their own
shortcomings in making sense of word problems (see
also Ahn et al., 2024; Arnau -Blasco et al., 2024) . If
anything, LLMs can reproduce human solution
processes by training, but it does not reflect their own,
underlying solution.
Due to their strong performance on these s -problems,
we risk over-estimating classroom readiness unless new
benchmarks capture modelling, reflection and
robustness. Even the most advanced models ignore
issues in 30% to 40% of non -sensical problems. This
seems insufficient for classroom use at least without an
additional human filter. Moreover, if students interact
with a chatbot while trying to solve real -world problems
on their own, they might be confronted with an LLM
approving their unrealistic answers (or maybe even
correcting their realistic answers), similar to what was
observed for teachers by Verschaffel et al. (1997).
5.5. Conclusion
Today, LLMs are excellent word -problem solvers.
However, due to their architecture and the way they have
been trained, they seem to have perfected something
that students are also very good at: Solving word
problems without making sense of them. Even though
astonishing, this is not a desirable path for humans to
follow.

6 References
Ahn, J., Verma, R., Lou, R., Liu, D., Zhang, R., & Yin, W. (2024, March).
Large Language Models for Mathematical Reasoning: Progresses
and Challenges. In N. Falk, S. Papi, & M. Zhang, Proceedings of the
18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for

[PAGE 10]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop St. Julian’s,
Malta.
Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., Alayrac, J.-B., Yu, J., Soricut, R., Schalkwyk, J., Dai,
A. M., Hauth, A., & Millican, K. (2023). Gemini: a family of highly
capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805.
Anthropic. (2024). Claude 3 Model Card.
https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-3-family
Arnau-Blasco, J., Arevalillo-Herráez, M., Solera-Monforte, S., & Wu, Y.
(2024). Using Large Language Models to Support Teaching and
Learning of Word Problem Solving in Tutoring Systems Generative
Intelligence and Intelligent Tutoring Systems: 20th International
Conference, ITS 2024, Thessaloniki, Greece, June 10–13, 2024,
Proceedings, Part I, Thessaloniki, Greece.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-63028-6_1
Blum, W., & Leiß, D. (2005). Modellieren im Unterricht mit der
„Tanken“-Aufgabe. mathematik lehren, 128, 18-21.
Blum, W., & Leiss, D. (2007). How do students and teachers deal with
modelling problems. Mathematical modelling (ICTMA 12): Education,
engineering and economics, 222-231.
Blum, W., & Niss, M. (1991). Applied mathematical problem solving,
modelling, applications, and links to other subjects - state, trends
and issues in mathematics instruction. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 22, 37-68. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00302716
Carotenuto, G., Di Martino, P., & Lemmi, M. (2021). Students’
suspension of sense making in problem solving. ZDM –
Mathematics Education, 53(4), 817-830.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11858-020-01215-0
Chang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Yang, L., Zhu, K., Chen, H., Yi, X.,
Wang, C., Wang, Y., Ye, W., Zhang, Y., Chang, Y., Yu, P. S., Yang, Q.,
& Xie, X. (2024). A Survey on Evaluation of Large Language
Models. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., 15(3), Article 39.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3641289
Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L.,
Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., & Nakano, R. (2021). Training
verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14168.
Daroczy, G., Wolska, M., Meurers, W. D., & Nuerk, H. C. (2015). Word
problems: A review of linguistic and numerical factors
contributing to their difficulty. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, Article
348. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00348
Gao, L., Madaan, A., Zhou, S., Alon, U., Liu, P., Yang, Y., Callan, J., &
Neubig, G. (2023). Pal: Program-aided language models.
International Conference on Machine Learning,
Greer, B. (1993). The mathematical modeling perspective on wor (l) d
problems. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior.
Hegarty, M., Mayer, R. E., & Green, C. E. (1992). Comprehension of
arithmetic word problems: Evidence from students’ eye fixations.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 84(1), 76-84.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.87.1.18
Hjelte, A., Schindler, M., & Nilsson, P. (2020). Kinds of Mathematical
Reasoning Addressed in Empirical Research in Mathematics
Education: A Systematic Review. Education Sciences, 10(10), 289.
https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7102/10/10/289
Institut de Recherche sur l’Enseignement des Mathématiques (IREM),
Équipe «Élémentaire». (1980). Quel est l'âge du capitaine? In
lnstitut de Recherche sur l'Enseignement des Mathernatiques
(IREM) de Grenoble (Ed.), Bulletin de l' Association des professeurs
de Mathematique de l' Enseignement Public, no 323.
https://bibnum.publimath.fr/AAA/AAA80016.pdf
Jaffe, J. B., & Bolger, D. J. (2023). Cognitive Processes, Linguistic
Factors, and Arithmetic Word Problem Success: a Review of
Behavioral Studies. Educational Psychology Review, 35(4), 105.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-023-09821-6
Kasneci, E., Sessler, K., Küchemann, S., Bannert, M., Dementieva, D.,
Fischer, F., Gasser, U., Groh, G., Günnemann, S., Hüllermeier, E.,
Krusche, S., Kutyniok, G., Michaeli, T., Nerdel, C., Pfeffer, J., Poquet,
O., Sailer, M., Schmidt, A., Seidel, T., . . . Kasneci, G. (2023).
ChatGPT for good? On opportunities and challenges of large
language models for education. Learning and Individual
Differences, 103, 102274.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2023.102274
Kintsch, W., & Greeno, J. G. (1985). Understanding and solving word
arithmetic problems. Psychological Review, 92(1), 109-129.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.92.1.109
Koncel-Kedziorski, R., Roy, S., Amini, A., Kushman, N., & Hajishirzi, H.
(2016, June). MAWPS: A Math Word Problem Repository. In K.
Knight, A. Nenkova, & O. Rambow, Proceedings of the 2016
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies San Diego,
California.
Krohling, R. A. (2023). Bayesian artificial brain with ChatGPT. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.14732.
Kushman, N., Artzi, Y., Zettlemoyer, L., & Barzilay, R. (2014). Learning
to automatically solve algebra word problems. Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
Lai, H., Wang, B., Liu, J., He, F., Zhang, C., Liu, H., & Chen, H. (2024).
Solving Mathematical Problems Using Large Language Models: A
Survey https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5002356
Leiss, D., Plath, J., & Schwippert, K. (2019). Language and
mathematics - key factors influencing the comprehension process
in reality-based tasks. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 21(2),
131-153. https://doi.org/10.1080/10986065.2019.1570835
Liu, W., Hu, H., Zhou, J., Ding, Y., Li, J., Zeng, J., He, M., Chen, Q., Jiang,
B., Zhou, A., & He, L. (2024). Mathematical Language Models: A
Survey https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.07622
Lu, P., Qiu, L., Yu, W., Welleck, S., & Chang, K.-W. (2023, July). A Survey
of Deep Learning for Mathematical Reasoning. In A. Rogers, J.
Boyd-Graber, & N. Okazaki, Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) Toronto, Canada.
Ma, J., Dai, D., Sha, L., & Sui, Z. (2024). Large language models are
unconscious of unreasonability in math problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.19346.
Mayer, R. E., Larkin, J. H., & Kadane, J. B. (1984). A Cognitive Analysis
of Mathematical Problem-Solving Ability. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.),
Advances in the Psychology of Human Intelligence (Vol. 2, pp. 231273). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
https://cir.nii.ac.jp/crid/1571698599027538304
Miner, S., Takashima, Y., Han, S., Kouteili, S., Erata, F., Piskac, R., &
Shapiro, S. J. (2024). Scheherazade: Evaluating chain-of-thought
math reasoning in llms with chain-of-problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.00151.
Mishra, S., Mitra, A., Varshney, N., Sachdeva, B., Clark, P., Baral, C., &
Kalyan, A. (2022). NumGLUE: A suite of fundamental yet
challenging mathematical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.05660.
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., & Altman, D. G. (2009). Preferred
reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the
PRISMA statement. BMJ, 339, b2535.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b2535
Mondorf, P., & Plank, B. (2024). Beyond Accuracy: Evaluating the
Reasoning Behavior of Large Language Models--A Survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.01869.
OECD. (2006). PISA released items - mathematics
http://www.oecd.org/pisa/38709418.pdf
OECD. (2013). PISA 2012 released mathematics items.
https://www.oecd.org/pisa/pisaproducts/pisa2012-2006-rel-itemsmaths-ENG.pdf
OECD. (2014). PISA 2012 technical report. OECD.
https://www.oecd.org/pisa/pisaproducts/PISA-2012-technicalreport-final.pdf
OpenAI. (2023). GPT-3.5 Turbo fine-tuning and API updates.
https://openai.com/index/gpt-3-5-turbo-fine-tuning-and-apiupdates/
OpenAI. (2024a). GPT-4o mini: advancing cost-efficient intelligence.
https://openai.com/index/gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficientintelligence/

[PAGE 11]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
OpenAI. (2024b). OpenAI Python API library (Version 1.79.0).
https://github.com/openai/openai-python
OpenAI. (2025a). Introducing GPT-4.1 in the API.
https://openai.com/index/gpt-4-1/
OpenAI. (2025b). Introducing OpenAI o3 and o4-mini.
https://openai.com/index/introducing-o3-and-o4-mini/
OpenAI. (2025c). Introducing GPT-5.
https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5/
Paige, J. M., & Simon, H. A. (1966). Cognitive processes in solving
algebra word problems. In B. Kleinmuntz (Ed.), Problem solving:
Research, method, and theory (pp. 51-119). Wiley.
Patel, A., Bhattamishra, S., & Goyal, N. (2021). Are NLP Models really
able to Solve Simple Math Word Problems? North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Plaat, A., Wong, A., Verberne, S., Broekens, J., van Stein, N., & Back, T.
(2024). Reasoning with large language models, a survey
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.11511
Pólya, G. (1945). How to solve it. Princeton University Press.
Radford, A., & Narasimhan, K. (2018). Improving Language
Understanding by Generative Pre-Training.
Reusser, K. (1990). From text to situation to equation: cognitive
simulation of understanding and solving mathematical word
problems. In H. Mandl, E. De Corte, N. S. Bennett, & H. F. Friedrich
(Eds.), Learning and instruction in an international context (pp. 477498). Pergamon.
Saraf, A., Kamat, P., Gite, S., Kumar, S., & Kotecha, K. (2024). Towards
robust automated math problem solving: a survey of statistical
and deep learning approaches. Evolutionary Intelligence, 17(5),
3113-3150. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12065-024-00957-0
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1991). On mathematics as sense-making: an
informal attack on the unfortunate divorce of formal and informal
mathematics. In J. F. Voss, D. N. Perkins, & J. W. Segal (Eds.),
Informal reasoning and education (pp. 311-343). Erlbaum.
Schorcht, S., Buchholtz, N., & Baumanns, L. (2024). Prompt the
problem–investigating the mathematics educational quality of AIsupported problem solving by comparing prompt techniques.
Frontiers in Education.
Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., & Birch, A. (2016, August). Neural Machine
Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units. In K. Erk & N. A.
Smith, Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) Berlin, Germany.
Seßler, K., Rong, Y., Gözlüklü, E., & Kasneci, E. (2024). Benchmarking
Large Language Models for Math Reasoning Tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.10839.
Shi, F., Chen, X., Misra, K., Scales, N., Dohan, D., Chi, E. H., Schärli, N.,
& Zhou, D. (2023). Large language models can be easily distracted
by irrelevant context. International Conference on Machine
Learning.
Spreitzer, C., Straser, O., Zehetmeier, S., & Maaß, K. (2024).
Mathematical Modelling Abilities of Artificial Intelligence Tools:
The Case of ChatGPT. Education Sciences, 14(7), 698.
https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7102/14/7/698
Sundaram, S. S., Gurajada, S., Padmanabhan, D., Abraham, S. S., &
Fisichella, M. (2024). Does a language model “understand” high
school math? A survey of deep learning based word problem
solvers. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 14(4), e1534.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1534
Testolin, A. (2024). Can Neural Networks Do Arithmetic? A Survey on
the Elementary Numerical Skills of State-of-the-Art Deep Learning
Models. Applied Sciences, 14(2).
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.-A.,
Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., & Azhar, F. (2023).
Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.
N., Kaiser, Ł., & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 30.
Verschaffel, L., & De Corte, E. (1997). Teaching realistic mathematical
modeling in the elementary school: A teaching experiment with
fifth graders. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28(5),
577-601.
Verschaffel, L., De Corte, E., & Borghart, I. (1997). Pre-service
teachers' conceptions and beliefs about the role of real-world
knowledge in mathematical modelling of school word problems.
Learning and Instruction, 7(4), 339-359.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4752(97)00008-X
Verschaffel, L., De Corte, E., & Lasure, S. (1994). Realistic
considerations in mathematical modeling of school arithmetic
word problems. Learning and Instruction, 4(4), 273-294.
Verschaffel, L., Greer, B., & De Corte, E. (2000). Making sense of word
problems. Swets & Zeitlinger.
Verschaffel, L., Schukajlow, S., Star, J., & Van Dooren, W. (2020). Word
problems in mathematics education: A survey. ZDM Mathematics
Education, 52(1), 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11858-020-011304
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V.,
& Zhou, D. (2022). Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in
large language models. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 35, 24824-24837.
Xu, X., Xiao, T., Chao, Z., Huang, Z., Yang, C., & Wang, Y. (2024). Can
LLMs Solve longer Math Word Problems Better? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.14804.
Zheng, L., Long, M., Zhong, L., & Gyasi, J. F. (2022). The effectiveness
of technology-facilitated personalized learning on learning
achievements and learning perceptions: A meta-analysis.
Education and Information Technologies, 27(8), 11807-1183

[PAGE 12]
Preprint August 2025 – This version has not been peer-reviewed. – Please check for updated versions.
Appendix
Figure A.1: Example Word Problems

Word Problem Source
Katie picked 3 tulips and 9 roses to make flower bouquets. If she only used 10 of the flowers though, how many extra
flowers did Katie pick?

MAWPS
(Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016)

Sam invited 9 friends to a birthday party, but 6 couldn't come. If he wanted to buy enough cupcakes so each person could
have exactly 2 how many should he buy?

ASDiv
(Zheng et al., 2022)
Marco and his dad went strawberry picking. Together they collected strawberries that weighed 36 pounds. On the way
back Marco ' dad lost 8 pounds of strawberries. Marco's strawberries now weighed 12 pounds. How much did his dad's
strawberries weigh now?"

SVAMP
(Patel et al., 2021)
Hansel makes $30,000 a year and just received a 10% raise. Gretel makes the same amount as Hansel but received a 15%
raise. How much more money will Gretel make compared to Hansel?

GSM8k
(Cobbe et al., 2021)
John wins an award at work. The award has a 1 time monetary reward of $5000 and a 5% raise in salary. If he makes
8152111 a week, every week of the year and he got the award on the first day of the year how much money did he make
that year?

GSM-hard
(Gao et al., 2023)
Emily has 4 kids named Amy, Jackson, Corey, and Jason. Amy is 5 years older than Jackson and 2 years younger than Corey.
Jason is 10. Jason is 1 year younger than Corey. If it is true that Jackson is exactly 5 years old, then the following is true:
[Joseph takes care of 12 dogs.] Otherwise, the following is true: [Joseph takes care of 10 dogs.] Each dog that Joseph takes
care of takes .5 hours a day to walk and take care of their business. How many hours per week does Joseph spend taking
care of dogs?

GSM8k-Scheherazade
(Miner et al., 2024)
On a bright Saturday morning, a mother decided to take advantage of the weekend sales at her local supermarket. With a
shopping list in hand, she navigated through the aisles, picking up items she needed for the week. Among her finds were a
rich, dark cocoa powder priced at $4.20, essential for her famous chocolate cake. Next, she grabbed a bottle of laundry
detergent, a necessity for the upcoming week’s laundry, priced at $9.45. Lastly, she couldn’t resist adding a package of
pasta to her cart, a steal at just $1.35, perfect for Wednesday night’s dinner. After browsing through the aisles and picking
up a few more items, she made her way to the cashier. Handing over a crisp $20 bill to pay for her purchases, she waited
for her change. How much change did the cashier hand back to her after her purchases?

E-GSM
(Xu et al., 2024)
Lucy has $65 in the bank. She made a $15 deposit and then followed by a $4 withdrawal. Lucy’s mother’s monthly rent is
$10. What is Lucy’s bank balance?

GSM-IC
(Shi et al., 2023)
Xiao Ming bought a birthday cake for his birthday. He cut the cake into 4 pieces, Xiao Hong ate 3 pieces and Xiao Li ate 2
pieces. How many pieces of cake are left?

UMP
(Ma et al., 2024)
A man can lift one box in each of his hands. How many boxes can a group of 5 people hold in total?

NumGlue
(Mishra et al., 2022)
Herr Stein wohnt in Tier, 20 km von der Grenze zu Luxemburg entfernt. Er fährt mit seinem VW Golf zum Tanken nach
Luxemburg, wo sich direkt hinter der Grenze eine Tankstelle befindet. Dort kostet der Liter Benzin nur 0.85 Euro, im
Gegensatz zu 1.1 Euro in Tier. Lohnt sich diese Fahrt für Herrn Stein? Begründe deine Antwort.

Spreitzer et al., 2024
(Blum & Leiss, 2005)
How can you bring up from the river exactly six quarts of water when you have only two containers, a four quart pail and a
nine quart pail, to measure with?

Schorcht et al., 2024
(Polya 1945)
Helen has just got a new bike. It has a speedometer which sits on the handlebar. The speedometer can tell Helen the
distance she travels and her average speed for a trip. Helen rode her bike from home to the river, which is 4 km away. It
took her 9 minutes. She rode home using a shorter route of 3 km. This only took her 6 minutes. What was Helen's average
speed, in km/h, for the trip to the river and back?

PISA
(OECD, 2013)
A man wants to have a rope long enough to stretch between two poles 12 meters apart, but he has only one pieces of rope
1,5 meters long. How many of these pieces of rope would he need to tie together to stretch between the poles?

Greer, 1993
Sven's record time at 50 meters breaststroke is 54 seconds. In how much time does he swim the 200-meter breaststroke?

Verschaffel & De Corte, 1997
Grandfather gives his 4 grandchildren a box containing 18 balloons, which they share equally. How many balloons does
each grandchild get?

Verschaffel et al., 1994
A shepherd has 360 sheep and 10 dogs. How old is the shepherd?

IREM, 1980