[PAGE 1]
INTEGRATING EXTERNAL TOOLS WITH LARGE LANGUAGE
MODELS (LLM) TO IMPROVE ACCURACY
A PREPRINT
Nripesh Niketan1*
nripesh14@gmail.com
Hadj Batatia1†
h.batatia@hw.ac.uk
July 14, 2025
ABSTRACT
This paper deals with improving querying large language models (LLMs). It is well-known that
without relevant contextual information, LLMs can provide poor quality responses or tend to hallucinate. Several initiatives have proposed integrating LLMs with external tools to provide them with
up-to-date data to improve accuracy. In this paper, we propose a framework to integrate external
tools to enhance the capabilities of LLMs in answering queries in educational settings. Precisely, we
develop a framework that allows accessing external APIs to request additional relevant information.
Integrated tools can also provide computational capabilities such as calculators or calendars. The proposed framework has been evaluated using datasets from the Multi-Modal Language Understanding
(MMLU) collection. The data consists of questions on mathematical and scientific reasoning. Results
compared to state-of-the-art language models show that the proposed approach significantly improves
performance. Our Athena framework achieves 83% accuracy in mathematical reasoning and 88% in
scientific reasoning, substantially outperforming all tested models including GPT-4o, LLaMA-Large,
Mistral-Large, Phi-Large, and GPT-3.5, with the best baseline model (LLaMA-Large) achieving only
67% and 79% respectively. These promising results open the way to creating complex computing
ecosystems around LLMs to make their use more natural to support various tasks and activities.
Keywords LLM · tool integration · precise querying · external APIs · educational AI
1 Introduction
The recent development of Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT, BERT [1], and LLaMA [2], has had a big
impact on natural language processing (NLP) and artificial intelligence (AI). These models have shown an impressive
ability to comprehend and produce human-like text and are powered by extensive datasets and complex algorithms.
Current LLM models are great in handling and producing natural language but face difficulties with tasks that demand
access to current data or active computational capabilities. For example, responding to inquiries about current stock
market trends or solving complex mathematical problems is beyond their reach. This limitation is largely due to LLMs
being trained on fixed datasets and their limited ability to directly connect with external databases or computational
tools.
To overcome these challenges, it is becoming necessary to integrate LLMs with external tools like calculators, calendars,
and databases. This combination improves the capabilities of LLMs, allowing them to process language while having
access to and analysing current data, and handling computational tasks. This expansion broadens their practical use and
application by a large margin. Recent developments in LLMs have focused on extending their capabilities through
external tools to address tasks like arithmetic, factual lookups, and real-time information retrieval. Integrating external
tools with LLMs methods can be classified into four major categories: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), Code
execution and computation, connection to APIs, Hybrid systems. Retrieval-augmented methods aim at connecting LLMs
∗ORCID: 0009-0008-2066-1937
†ORCID: 0000-0003-0433-2152
arXiv:2507.08034v1 [cs.CL] 9 Jul 2025

[PAGE 2]
Integrating External Tools with Large Language Models
with external databases or retrieval systems, such as search engines and databases, to retrieve real-time data in order to
provide more accurate, industry-specific, and relevant answers [3, 4]. Integrating code execution and computation tools,
like Python, data analysis, solvers, calculator, and symbolic reasoners, allows executing code, performing mathematical
computations to enhance LLMs capabilities to solve complex tasks [5, 6, 7, 8]. Connecting APIs, such as financial,
health, weather, to utilise specialised service in order to handle domain-specific tasks [9, 10, 11, 12]. More general
hybrid systems aim at combining symbolic reasoning, knowledge graphs, rule-based engines and other techniques
to regularise or guide LLMs towards more deterministic and explainable reasoning [ 13, 14, 15]. In this work, we
are interested in frameworks that allow connecting external APIs, such as calculators, calendars, solvers, in order to
improve precision of LLM answers in an educational context.
The Toolformer, introduced by Meta AI Research and Universitat Pompeu Fabra, enables LLMs to autonomously use
simple APIs. This model employs a self-supervised loss to generate a language modelling dataset with embedded API
calls, which is then fine-tuned to enhance future token predictions. Toolformer incorporates various tools like calculators
and search engines, demonstrating improved zero-shot performance on downstream tasks and addressing limitations
such as fact hallucination and outdated information [16]. The Gorilla model, based on a fine-tuned LLaMA model,
focuses on enhancing API interaction within LLMs. It surpasses GPT-4 in generating accurate API calls and adapting
to document changes, significantly reducing hallucination issues. Gorilla is tested against the APIBench dataset, which
includes diverse APIs, showcasing its ability to handle over 1,600 APIs effectively. This model enhances the practical
application of LLMs in real-world scenarios by connecting them to a broad spectrum of available APIs [17].
Integrating symbolic reasoning with Large Language Models (LLMs) has also been investigated to enhance their
ability to execute arithmetic and other computational tasks, where deterministic solutions are critical. Models such
as Program-Aided Language models (PAL) and ToolkenGPT have been pivotal in this development. PAL introduces
a novel approach by generating Python programs as intermediate reasoning steps. This method leverages the LLMs’
language understanding and the precise execution of a Python interpreter, significantly improving arithmetic and
symbolic reasoning tasks. For instance, PAL outperformed traditional models on the gsm8k math problem benchmark
by 8%, and by 40% on the more challenging gsm-hard version [18]. ToolkenGPT utilizes a unique “toolken” token
that triggers specific tool usage within the model, enhancing both fine-tuning and in-context learning. This framework
allows the LLM to dynamically adapt to an expanding set of tools, showing strong performance in tasks requiring
numerical reasoning and knowledge-based question answering [19].
Frameworks connecting LLMs with APIs have revolutionized task execution across various domains, with models like
TaskMatrix.AI and Gorilla leading the way. TaskMatrix.AI, developed by Microsoft, integrates foundation models with
APIs to tackle a wide range of tasks, leveraging collective intelligence from various models. This system combines a
Multimodal Conversational Foundation Model for user interaction with a vast API platform to execute tasks effectively
across digital and physical spaces [20]. The Gorilla model enhances LLMs’ ability to interact with APIs, bridging the
gap between natural language processing and real-world application by facilitating the use of over 1,600 APIs. This
model adapts to document changes and reduces hallucinations, improving how users interact with digital tools through
natural language queries [17].
The LATM (LLMs As Tool Makers) framework represents a shift in LLM applications from using external tools to
creating and utilizing bespoke tools. This approach enhances problem-solving capabilities and reduces dependency on
external resources. LATM operates in two phases: tool making and tool using. Initially, LLMs create tools as Python
functions tailored for specific tasks. These tools are then used by the same or different LLMs for problem-solving,
allowing for a flexible, cost-effective approach. This framework has been validated in tasks like the Big-Bench, showing
that it can match higher-cost models in performance while reducing inference costs. LATM demonstrates a practical,
scalable method for enhancing LLMs’ functionality, potentially transforming their role in AI by enabling them to
independently create and apply tools for complex tasks.
This paper focuses on creating a framework that supports the integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) with
external tools. The study covers tools and technologies to implement the integration of LLMs with external tools and
evaluates its effectiveness in real-world applications.
2 Proposed Framework
In order to allow LLMs to use external tools to enhance their capabilities, we designed a framework, named Athena. The
system manages API of external tools that can be used to enable the LLM to provide accurate, up-to-date, data-driven
responses across various domains.

[PAGE 3]
Integrating External Tools with Large Language Models
2.1 Architecture
The architecture of the proposed framework is shown in Figure 1. The ExternalServiceIntegrator component manages
the tools repository. Any added tool is provided to the system using a schema-like structure, implemented using
frameworks like Pydantic, which specifies information about the tool such as specific functionalities, comprehensive
descriptions, and required parameters. More precisely the schema includes (Listing 1) the tool’s name, description, and
the types and details of the arguments it accepts. This structured approach allows the LLM to have explicit knowledge
of each tool’s capabilities and requirements.
Figure 1: Architecture of the proposed Athena framework showing the integration of external tools with LLMs through
various components including ExternalServiceIntegrator, MessageSubmission, RunMonitoring, HandleRequiredAction,
and UpdateMessage services.
Listing 1: Format of a tool description.
def add ( a : int , b : int ) -> int :
""" Adds a and b .
Args :
a : first int
b : second int
"""
return a + b
The LLM’s awareness of the available tools is facilitated by the registration of these tools within its operational
environment, typically achieved through a configuration that includes each tool’s detailed schema. These schemas act
like blueprints that tell the LLM what each tool does, what inputs it needs, and the kind of response it generates. By
referencing these schemas, the LLM can match tools to user queries requiring specific external data or computations
that are beyond the LLM’s internal processing capabilities.
The MessageSubmission component implements a user interface that allows submitting user queries and managing
context.
The RunMonitoring service is responsible for identifying required external tools. The decision-making process regarding
when to use these tools starts with the LLM analysing the user’s input. This analysis involves parsing the query to
extract key information and intent. If the query aligns with the capabilities of one or more registered tools—determined
by keyword matching, intent recognition, or query complexity—the LLM then identifies this as an opportunity to use

[PAGE 4]
Integrating External Tools with Large Language Models
an external tool. For instance, a question about current weather conditions might trigger the identification of a weather
data tool based on keywords like “weather” and the inclusion of a geographical location.
Once a tool is deemed appropriate for a query, the HandleRequiredAction service proceeds to extract the necessary
parameters from the user input. This extraction process uses natural language understanding techniques to identify and
map the required data points from the query to the parameters defined in the tool’s schema. For example, if the tool
requires a city name and date to fetch weather data, the LLM extracts these details from the query.
After parameter extraction, the service formats these parameters according to the API’s expected structure, ensuring
that all required data points are correctly included. This often involves transforming natural language inputs into more
structured data formats that the API can process, such as converting a city’s name into a standardized location code.
The system then sends the formatted parameters to the external tool’s API. Upon receiving the results from the API, the
returned data is integrated into the ongoing dialogue. This integration is handled by converting the API’s raw output
into a natural, conversational response that aligns with the user’s original query and maintains the flow of the dialogue.
The UpdateMessage service submits the newly updated query to the LLM.
This entire process is iterative; the LLM continuously assesses whether additional information from external tools is
needed to fully address the user’s query. This assessment might lead to multiple rounds of tool invocations until the
query is completely answered. Finally, the comprehensive response, enriched with both the LLM’s internal knowledge
and the external tool’s specialized data, is delivered to the user.
This streamlined methodology enables the LLM to effectively augment its responses with specialized external data,
thereby enhancing the accuracy and relevance of the information provided to the user.
Langchain Implementation: In the LangChain implementation of the Athena framework, the system uses the
Unify [21] platform in conjunction with the LangChain framework. Unify is different from traditional LLMs. It
functions as a comprehensive hosting tool that aggregates various open-source LLMs, providing access to them through
a unified API. This setup allows users to use a diverse range of LLMs tailored to different tasks and capabilities. The
LangChain framework is integral to this implementation. It acts as middleware that integrates the external tools with the
LLMs hosted on the Unify platform. In this setup, LangChain abstracts the complexity of tool integration from the user
and streamlines the process of increasing LLM capabilities with external APIs.
In practical terms, the LangChain implementation operates under a less hands-on approach from the developers or users
in terms of direct API management. Instead of manually preparing and managing API calls, users simply configure
LangChain to recognize and utilize the available tools. This part of the system’s operation—deciding which LLM to
deploy for a given task and how to integrate the response from an external tool—is managed internally by LangChain.
3 Evaluation
In order to evaluate the proposed framework, we integrated a few tools and ran various experiments on mathematical
and scientific reasoning. This section describes the integrated tools, the experiments and the results.
3.1 Sample Integrated Tools
The proposed framework is generic and allows integrating any API. However, in this study, we focused on a few
important ones, namely ArXiv, Google SERPer, OpenWeatherMap, Google Calendar, and Wolfram Alpha.
• As Athena’s computational backbone, the Wolfram Alpha API supports complex calculations and algorithmbased queries across various scientific and mathematical fields.
• The Google SERPer API enables the system to perform web searches and deliver relevant online content in
response to user queries. This tool is critical for extending the model’s knowledge beyond its training data.
• ArXiv API allows the system to access and provide detailed information on scholarly articles. It aids users in
retrieving and understanding academic content quickly, enhancing research efficiency.
• The OpenWeatherMap API provides real-time weather forecasts and historical data, allowing the AI to assist
users in weather-related planning and inquiries effectively.
• Google Calendar is integrated to manage scheduling and time-based tasks. This feature allows users to
interact with their calendar through natural language commands, supported by secure authentication and event
management functionalities.

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: • | As Athena’s computational backbone, the Wolfram Alpha API supports complex calculations and algorithmRow 1: •: | As Athena’s computational backbone, the Wolfram Alpha API supports complex calculations and algorithm-: based queries across various scientific and mathematical fields.
Row 2: •: • | As Athena’s computational backbone, the Wolfram Alpha API supports complex calculations and algorithm-: The Google SERPer API enables the system to perform web searches and deliver relevant online content in
Row 3: •: | As Athena’s computational backbone, the Wolfram Alpha API supports complex calculations and algorithm-: response to user queries. This tool is critical for extending the model’s knowledge beyond its training data.
Row 4: •: • | As Athena’s computational backbone, the Wolfram Alpha API supports complex calculations and algorithm-: ArXiv API allows the system to access and provide detailed information on scholarly articles. It aids users in
Row 5: •: | As Athena’s computational backbone, the Wolfram Alpha API supports complex calculations and algorithm-: retrieving and understanding academic content quickly, enhancing research efficiency.
Row 6: •: • | As Athena’s computational backbone, the Wolfram Alpha API supports complex calculations and algorithm-: The OpenWeatherMap API provides real-time weather forecasts and historical data, allowing the AI to assist
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
Integrating External Tools with Large Language Models
3.2 Datasets
Specific datasets from the Multi-Modal Language Understanding (MMLU) collection hosted on HuggingFace were
chosen to test the Athena framework against various state-of-the-art language models. These datasets contain multiplechoice questions designed to assess the models’ proficiency across different domains and educational levels. The
structured format of these datasets, where each entry includes a question, four potential answers, and the correct answer,
provides a standardized method to measure the accuracy of the AI models’ responses. The selected datasets focus
mostly on mathematical and scientific disciplines at various educational stages.
For mathematics, datasets labelled as Elementary Mathematics, High School Mathematics, and College Mathematics
were used. To create a comprehensive math testing dataset, 33 questions were selected from the Elementary and
High School Mathematics set, and 34 questions from the College Mathematics set. This selection ensures a balanced
representation of both basic and advanced mathematical problems. This approach challenges the models to handle a
range of complexities and mathematical concepts.
Similarly, for science, the chosen datasets included High School and College levels for Physics, Chemistry, and Biology.
High School Physics, Chemistry, Biology contributed 16 questions each; and each of College Physics, Chemistry,
Biology contributed 17 questions, with a total of 100 science questions. This selection tests the model’s ability to
interpret and solve scientific problems that require fact-based knowledge and the application of scientific theories. This
diverse range of subjects and difficulty levels in these datasets also allows for a thorough evaluation of how well the
model can answer different types of inquiries.
3.3 Experimental Scenario
Testing Procedure: A Jupyter notebook was used to systematically test the models on the selected multiple-choice
questions from the MMLU datasets. The testing process involved a setup where each question from the datasets was
formatted in a specific way for consistency and to simulate a natural questioning environment. Each question was
presented to the Large Language Model (LLM) along with the corresponding multiple-choice options. The format was
structured to include the question followed by the options, each labelled with letters (A, B, C, D). To standardize the
evaluation and to capture the model’s responses in a structured manner, the LLM was instructed to output its answers
in JSON format. This requirement was specified in the prompt to the model to ensure that the output could be easily
parsed and analysed. Listing 2 shows an example of the specific format requested, showing clear separation between
the chosen answer and the text of the answer, helping in the automated evaluation of responses.
Listing 2: Format of response.
" { question }
Options : { options }
I want you to give me the output in the form of json .
Example :
’’’ json {
" answe r " : " < The right option (A , B , C , D ) >" ,
" value " : " < Value of multiple choice answer > " ,
} ’’’ "
Recording and Evaluation: During the test runs, each response from the LLM was recorded from the Jupyter notebook.
The responses were then compared to the correct answers provided in the datasets. For each response, it was recorded
whether the LLM correctly identified the right option (A, B, C, or D). The primary metrics noted were the number of
correct and incorrect answers, which were used to calculate the accuracy of the LLM for both the mathematics and
science questions separately.
Comparison: The Athena framework and all baseline language models (GPT-3.5, GPT-4o, LLaMA-Large, MistralLarge, and Phi-Large) were presented with the exact same set of questions under identical conditions to ensure a fair
and controlled comparison. This methodology aimed to provide a clear picture of how each model performs when faced
with identical academic challenges, focusing on their ability to interpret and solve mathematical and scientific problems.
The comparison tests were designed to highlight the differences in accuracy and capacity across all evaluated models.
3.4 Results
This section presents the results of applying the proposed Athena framework to mathematical and scientific reasoning
datasets, comparing its performance against state-of-the-art language models including GPT-3.5, GPT-4o, LLaMALarge, Mistral-Large, and Phi-Large.

[PAGE 6]
Integrating External Tools with Large Language Models
Mathematical Reasoning Results: The evaluation on mathematical questions revealed significant performance
differences across models (Figure 2 and Table 1). Among the baseline language models, LLaMA-Large achieved the
highest accuracy at 67%, followed by Mistral-Large at 57%, GPT-4o at 53%, Phi-Large at 47%, and GPT-3.5 at 36%.
These models showed varying capabilities in handling mathematical problems, with performance generally limited to
questions that could be solved through memorized knowledge rather than computational reasoning.
Figure 2: Mathematical reasoning accuracy comparison between Athena framework and state-of-the-art language
models using MMLU mathematics dataset.
Table 1: Mathematical reasoning accuracy comparison
Model Accuracy
GPT-3.5 0.36
GPT-4o 0.53
LLaMA-Large 0.67
Mistral-Large 0.57
Phi-Large 0.47
Athena Framework 0.83
In contrast, the Athena framework achieved an accuracy of 83%, substantially outperforming all baseline models.
This improvement was largely attributed to Athena’s ability to leverage integrated computational tools, particularly
calculators, for numerical problem-solving. The framework demonstrated strong capacity to handle diverse mathematical
challenges, from basic arithmetic to complex algebraic problems that required step-by-step computational reasoning
beyond what standalone LLMs could provide.
Scientific Reasoning Results: The scientific reasoning evaluation showed similar patterns, though with generally
higher baseline performance across all models (Figure 3 and Table 2). LLaMA-Large again performed best among
baseline models with 79% accuracy, followed by GPT-4o at 77%, while Mistral-Large and Phi-Large both achieved
66%, and GPT-3.5 reached 56%. The baseline models showed particular strength in theoretical questions involving
direct recall of scientific concepts and definitions.

[PAGE 7]
Integrating External Tools with Large Language Models
Figure 3: Scientific reasoning accuracy comparison between Athena framework and state-of-the-art language models
using MMLU science dataset.
Table 2: Scientific reasoning accuracy comparison
Model Accuracy
GPT-3.5 0.56
GPT-4o 0.77
LLaMA-Large 0.79
Mistral-Large 0.66
Phi-Large 0.66
Athena Framework 0.88
The Athena framework achieved 88% accuracy in scientific reasoning, maintaining its superior performance across
domains. Out of 100 science questions, Athena incorrectly answered only 12, demonstrating substantial capability
to handle a broad spectrum of scientific inquiries. The framework’s success was particularly evident in questions
requiring numerical calculations combined with theoretical knowledge, showcasing its ability to effectively integrate
computational tools with factual data retrieval.
Analysis and Implications: The results demonstrate that while modern LLMs have improved significantly over earlier
generations, tool integration provides capabilities that cannot be achieved through model scaling alone. The performance
gap between Athena and the best baseline model (LLaMA-Large) was 16 percentage points in mathematics and 9
percentage points in science. The smaller gap in scientific reasoning compared to mathematical reasoning suggests that
newer models have improved significantly in handling factual scientific knowledge, but still benefit substantially from
computational tools for calculation-intensive problems.
These findings confirm that tool integration remains a valuable approach even as base model capabilities improve, and
that the Athena framework provides consistent benefits across different types of reasoning tasks. The framework’s
ability to leverage external computational resources enables it to handle complex problems that require both linguistic
understanding and precise mathematical computation.
4 Conclusion
This paper presented the Athena framework for integrating external tools with LLMs to enhance the accuracy of model
response. The framework allows for the integration of any tool. A study was conducted using a set of typical tools that

[PAGE 8]
Integrating External Tools with Large Language Models
can benefit educational applications. The evaluation using mathematics and science questions from the MMLU dataset
demonstrated significant improvements over standalone LLM performance.
The key contributions of this work include: (1) A flexible framework architecture that allows seamless integration of
external APIs and computational tools with LLMs, (2) Comprehensive evaluation demonstrating significant performance improvements in educational domains, with 83% accuracy in mathematics and 88% in science, substantially
outperforming all tested state-of-the-art models including GPT-4o, LLaMA-Large, Mistral-Large, and Phi-Large, (3)
Evidence that tool integration provides capabilities that cannot be achieved through model scaling alone, and (4) A
practical implementation using LangChain and Unify platforms that abstracts the complexity of tool integration.
The results indicate that while modern LLMs have improved substantially, there remains a significant advantage in
augmenting them with specialized external tools, particularly for tasks requiring computational capabilities or access to
current information. Future work will focus on expanding the range of integrated tools, improving the decision-making
process for tool selection, and exploring applications in other domains beyond education.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Heriot-Watt University. We thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback and suggestions
that helped improve this paper.
References
[1] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[2] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[3] Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, and Jamie Callan. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2023.
[4] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich
Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledgeintensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459–9474, 2020.
[5] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang,
Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
[6] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[7] Sean Welleck, Jiacheng Liu, Ronan Le Bras, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Yejin Choi, and Kyunghyun Cho. Naturalproofs:
Mathematical theorem proving in natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01112, 2021.
[8] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert,
Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
[9] Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse,
Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with
human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
[10] Mojtaba Komeili, Kurt Shuster, and Jason Weston. Internet-augmented dialogue generation. International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8460–8478, 2021.
[11] Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng, Alicia
Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
[12] Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Pengcheng He, Hao Cheng, Yujia Xie, Yu Hu, Qiuyuan Huang, Lars Liden, Zhou Yu,
Weizhu Chen, et al. Check your facts and try again: Improving large language models with external knowledge
and automated feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12813, 2023.

[PAGE 9]
Integrating External Tools with Large Language Models
[13] Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Jiapu Wang, and Xindong Wu. Unifying large language models
and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 2023.
[14] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629, 2022.
[15] Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. Logic-lm: Empowering large language
models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12295, 2023.
[16] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola
Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
[17] Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model connected
with massive apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.
[18] Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig.
Pal: Program-aided language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10435, 2022.
[19] Shibo Hao, Tianyang Liu, Zhen Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Toolkengpt: Augmenting frozen language models with
massive tools via tool embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11554, 2023.
[20] Yaobo Liang, Chenfei Wu, Ting Song, Wenshan Wu, Yan Xia, Yu Liu, Yang Ou, Shuai Lu, Lei Ji, Shaoguang Mao,
et al. Taskmatrix.ai: Completing tasks by connecting foundation models with millions of apis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.16434, 2023.
[21] Unify. Unify: The complete llm platform, 2024. Accessed: 2024-01-15.