[PAGE 1]
Lessons from A Large Language Model-based Outdoor Trail
Recommendation Chatbot with Retrieval Augmented Generation
Julia Ann Mathew and Suining He
{julia.ann_mathew, suining.he}uconn.edu
Ubiquitous & Urban Computing Lab
School of Computing
University of Connecticut
Abstract
The increasing popularity of outdoor recreational activities (such
as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational
AI system to provide informative and personalized suggestion on
outdoor trails. Challenges arise in response to (1) how to provide accurate outdoor trail information via conversational AI; and (2) how
to enable usable and efficient recommendation services. To address
above, this paper discusses the preliminary and practical lessons
learned from developing Judy, an outdoor trail recommendation
chatbot based on the large language model (LLM) with retrieval
augmented generation (RAG). To gain concrete system insights, we
have performed case studies with the outdoor trails in Connecticut
(CT), US. We have conducted web-based data collection, outdoor
trail data management, and LLM model performance studies on
the RAG-based recommendation. Our experimental results have
demonstrated the accuracy, effectiveness, and usability of Judy in
recommending outdoor trails based on the LLM with RAG.
CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence.
Keywords
Outdoor Trail Recommendation, Large Language Model, Retrieval
Augmented Generation
1 Introduction
The rising demand for the outdoor recreational activities has created
the need for the outdoor trail recommendation [ 9]. Such recommendation aims to consolidate scattered knowledge such as trail
location, difficulty, length, and permitted activities (e.g., biking),
and provide accurate recommendation about trails for safe and
pleasant activity planning.
To meet this need, this prototype study discusses the practical lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor
trail recommendation chatbot based on conversational AI. Toward
development and deployment of Judy, we have investigated the
following two questions. First, how can we provide accurate outdoor trail knowledge in response to complex user query? Existing
rule-based chatbots for recommendation largely follow predefined
workflows. While they can handle specific and structured recommendation tasks, these chatbots could not handle complex or customized queries that deviate from their predefined rules, limiting
their recommendation capability. General-purpose chatbots based
on conversational AI, on the other hand, may lack the domainspecific knowledge needed for effective outdoor trail recommendation. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommendation services? Existing outdoor trail recommendation platforms
such as AllTrails [11] offer static information. However, these platforms largely lack the conversational interactivity. Therefore, the
users often need to shift through multiple trail reviews to plan their
trips.
Toward addressing the above questions, we have performed realworld outdoor trail data studies (over 260 trails in Connecticut),
and developed the system of Judy as the large language model
(LLM) recommendation chatbot with retrieval augmented generation (RAG) [10]. In particular, we have implemented RAG to retrieve
the most relevant trail information from a constructed trail database,
such that Judy can provides accurate outdoor trail information. We
have designed practical performance enhance mechanisms (such as
caching) to enhance retrieval efficiency, and enable usable recommendation services. We have performed real-world data analysis
based on outdoor trail data in Connecticut (CT), US, and conducted
extensive experimental studies to validate the accuracy, efficiency,
and usability of Judy in recommending the outdoor trails.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first overview
the system designs in Sec. 2. Then we present the design of Judy
with the LLM chatbot and RAG design in Sec. 3. We present the
experimental studies and lessons learned in Sec. 4, and conclude
the paper in Sec. 5.
2 System Overview
The designs of Judy, as showcased in Fig. 1, consist of the following two phases: (1) Data Preparation & Preprocessing : In this phase,
we pre-process and prepare the basic outdoor trail information
(including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the
MySQL database hosted on the Amazon RDS to streamline data
access and the subsequent retrieval augmented generation. (2) User
Query & Recommendation with RAG : Given the user query of the
outdoor trail, the LLM interprets the user query, and formulates a
corresponding SQL query that fetches the relevant data from the
structured database. The SQL query result, along with the user
original question, are fed to the LLM. The LLM leverages the above
contexts to generate a structured and user-friendly response regarding the outdoor trail recommendation.
arXiv:2508.05652v1 [cs.IR] 27 Jul 2025

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommenRow 1: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: AI system to provide informative and personalized suggestion on | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: dation services? Existing outdoor trail recommendation platforms
Row 2: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: outdoor trails. Challenges arise in response to (1) how to provide ac- | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: such as AllTrails [11] offer static information. However, these platRow 3: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: curate outdoor trail information via conversational AI; and (2) how | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: forms largely lack the conversational interactivity. Therefore, the
Row 4: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: to enable usable and efficient recommendation services. To address | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: users often need to shift through multiple trail reviews to plan their
Row 5: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: above, this paper discusses the preliminary and practical lessons | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: trips.
Row 6: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: learned from developing Judy, an outdoor trail recommendation | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: Toward addressing the above questions, we have performed realRow 7: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: chatbot based on the large language model (LLM) with retrieval | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: world outdoor trail data studies (over 260 trails in Connecticut),
Row 8: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: augmented generation (RAG). To gain concrete system insights, we | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: and developed the system of Judy as the large language model
Row 9: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: have performed case studies with the outdoor trails in Connecticut | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: (LLM) recommendation chatbot with retrieval augmented generaRow 10: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: (CT), US. We have conducted web-based data collection, outdoor | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: tion (RAG) [10]. In particular, we have implemented RAG to retrieve
Row 11: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: trail data management, and LLM model performance studies on | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: themost relevant trail information from a constructed trail database,
Row 12: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: the RAG-based recommendation. Our experimental results have | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: such that Judy can provides accurate outdoor trail information. We
Row 13: as hiking and biking) has boosted the demand for a conversational: demonstrated the accuracy, effectiveness, and usability of Judy in | tion. Second, how can we enable usable and efficient recommen-: have designed practical performance enhance mechanisms (such as
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=1 index=2]
Columns: Outdoor Trail Recommendation, Large Language Model, Retrieval | with the LLM chatbot and RAG design in Sec. 3. We present the
Row 1: Outdoor Trail Recommendation, Large Language Model, Retrieval: Augmented Generation | with the LLM chatbot and RAG design in Sec. 3. We present the: experimental studies and lessons learned in Sec. 4, and conclude
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=1 index=3]
Columns: cal lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor | (including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the
Row 1: cal lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor: trail recommendation chatbot based on conversational AI. Toward | (including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the: MySQL database hosted on the Amazon RDS to streamline data
Row 2: cal lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor: development and deployment of Judy, we have investigated the | (including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the: access and the subsequent retrieval augmented generation. (2) User
Row 3: cal lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor: following two questions. First, how can we provide accurate out- | (including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the: Query & Recommendation with RAG: Given the user query of the
Row 4: cal lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor: door trail knowledge in response to complex user query? Existing | (including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the: outdoor trail, the LLM interprets the user query, and formulates a
Row 5: cal lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor: rule-based chatbots for recommendation largely follow predefined | (including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the: corresponding SQL query that fetches the relevant data from the
Row 6: cal lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor: workflows. While they can handle specific and structured recom- | (including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the: structured database. The SQL query result, along with the user
Row 7: cal lessons and insights from the development of Judy, a outdoor: mendation tasks, these chatbots could not handle complex or cus- | (including the trail name, length, and difficult), and establish the: original question, are fed to the LLM. The LLM leverages the above
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
User
Query
Data Preparation
and Preprocessing
Recommendation
with RAG
Outdoor Trail Information
Outdoor Trail Reviews
MySQL
Database
1. FAISS
2. Sentence Transformer
3. Performance Enhancement
Figure 1: Overview of Judy and samples of our outdoor trail information and collected reviews.
3 Core Designs of Judy
This section presents the core designs of Judy. We first present
the data preparation and preprocessing in Sec. 3.1, followed by the
retrieval augmented generation designs in Sec. 3.2.
3.1 Data Preparation and Preprocessing
In developing Judy, we have crawled the basic information of outdoor trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,
difficulty, and pet permissions. To perform further natural language
analysis, we have collected reviews for these trails from the Google
Reviews and TrailLink [12]. To prepare our analysis, we have performed data pre-processing. We have filtered away irrelevant trail
reviews, removed emojis, excessive line spaces, asterisks, and other
unnecessary characters. We have performed standardized abbreviations (such as replacing “I’ve” with “I have”) to ensure the review
consistency. We have re-structured the reviews such that formatting
is consistent across all reviews.
In our Judy development, we have adopted the Selenium and
BeautifulSoup for web scraping to gather trail-related data such
as reviews, and trail features. To prepare the database, we have
used MySQL, which is hosted on Amazon RDS, to form a relational
database to store structured data, such as trail information and
reviews.
3.2 User Query and Recommendation with RAG
The user queries in our current system designs typically pertain
to features of the outdoor trail, such as the trail’s length, location,
difficulty level, permitted activities, trail accessibility, and other
attributes.
The LLM will determine whether the user’s query is recommendationrelevant. If yes, Judy will leverage the LLM to generate a personalized response. If the query is not recommendation-relevant, Judy
assesses whether it can be answered using the existing table schema.
If the LLM in Judy the user query can be resolved using the predefined schema, Judy will perform the SQL query, and retrieve the
necessary information regarding the outdoor trail. If the user query
requires more nuanced insights, such as opinions or user experiences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews
of the relevant trail to construct an accurate and contextually rich
response. Examples of such questions include “what do people say
about the scenery on Aldridge trail ”, “did visitors encounter wildlife
at Big Gulph trail ”, “how crowded is the Pine Hill trail usually ”, and
“what do reviews say about biking on the Windsor Locks Canal
trail”.
In terms of the RAG function, Judy will retrieve the relevant reviews and their corresponding embeddings. We have evaluated
three kinds of sentence embeddings — that is, Ollama ( nomicembed-text) [4], and two kinds of pre-trained Sentence Transformers [2]. One Sentence Transformer is trained question-answer (QA)
pairs ( multi-qa-mpnet-base-cos-v1) [ 8], and maps sentences
and paragraphs to a 512-dimensional dense vector space. Another
Sentence Transformer is the distilled version of multilingual Universal Sentence Encoder (distiluse-base-multilingual-cased-v2) [1,
6]. This transformer maps sentences and paragraphs to a 768dimensional dense vector space and was designed for semantic
search.
In our experimental studies, we have observed that both the Sentence Transformers exhibited significantly faster response times
compared to the Ollama embedding. Specifically, we have structured and created a total of 25 user queries (the same set of queries

[TABLE page=2 index=2]
Columns: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length, | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews
Row 1: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: difficulty, and pet permissions. To perform further natural language | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: of the relevant trail to construct an accurate and contextually rich
Row 2: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: analysis, we have collected reviews for these trails from the Google | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: response. Examples of such questions include “what do people say
Row 3: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: Reviews and TrailLink [12]. To prepare our analysis, we have per- | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: about the scenery on Aldridge trail”, “did visitors encounter wildlife
Row 4: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: formed data pre-processing. We have filtered away irrelevant trail | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: at Big Gulph trail”, “how crowded is the Pine Hill trail usually”, and
Row 5: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: reviews, removed emojis, excessive line spaces, asterisks, and other | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: “what do reviews say about biking on the Windsor Locks Canal
Row 6: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: unnecessary characters. We have performed standardized abbrevia- | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: trail”.
Row 7: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: tions (such as replacing “I’ve” with “I have”) to ensure the review | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: In terms of the RAG function, Judy will retrieve the relevant reRow 8: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: consistency.We have re-structured the reviews such that formatting | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: views and their corresponding embeddings. We have evaluated
Row 9: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: is consistent across all reviews. | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: three kinds of sentence embeddings — that is, Ollama (nomic
Row 10: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: In our Judy development, we have adopted the Selenium and | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: embed-text) [4], and two kinds of pre-trained Sentence TransformRow 11: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: BeautifulSoup for web scraping to gather trail-related data such | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: ers [2]. One Sentence Transformer is trained question-answer (QA)
Row 12: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: as reviews, and trail features. To prepare the database, we have | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: pairs (multi-qa-mpnet-base-cos-v1) [8], and maps sentences
Row 13: door trails a credible platform called CT Trail Finder, such as length,: used MySQL, which is hosted on Amazon RDS, to form a relational | ences, Judy will invoke the RAG function to process the reviews: and paragraphs to a 512-dimensional dense vector space. Another
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
in Sec. 3) with the ground-truth answers for our testing evaluation. The Sentence Transformer pre-trained on QA pairs (multiqa-mpnet-base-cos-v1) has delivered the fastest average response
time at 0.73s, followed by 2.89s by the distilled multilingual Universal Sentence Encoder (distiluse-base-multilingual-cased-v2),
and 4.69s by Ollama embeddings (nomic-embed-text).
In ourJudy, we adopt the Facebook AI Similarity Search (FAISS) [3]
to rank the relevance of the reviews to the user’s query. We find the
top 𝑘 relevant reviews based on their similarity scores (cosine similarity based on a dot product on normalized embeddings). These
selected relevant reviews and the user’s query are fed to the LLM,
and Judy synthesizes them and generates a comprehensive and
contextually appropriate responses.
In our Judy development, we have used Llama3 [13] for Judy’s
conversational abilities, natural language understanding, and response generation. We have adopted LangChain to form the conversational flow and integrates Llama3 with MySQL for enhanced
conversational functionality. We have adopted FAISS for similarity
searches and nearest neighbor queries on trail reviews dataset for
quick information retrieval.
In our experimental studies, we have observed the significantly
long response time of using RAG from our outdoor trail database.
To further enhance the efficiency of the RAG-based approach, we
have implemented caching for the embeddings and reviews of the
queried trails.
4 Experiment and Preliminary Insights
We find the measure of outdoor trail recommendation matching
based on the percentage of the correct answers against all the
questions. We measure the recommendation matching via the semantic similarities across the generated responses and groundtruth answers using the pre-trained sentence transformer (multiqa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1) [7]. We used and tested a total of 25 user
queries (the same set of queries in Sec. 3) with the ground-truth
answers for our testing evaluation. We also compare Judy with the
same LLM backbone based on SQL only (without RAG).
Recommendation Matching: In our experiment, we have observed
that Judy achieved a recommendation matching of 96%, which
outperforms the 88% accuracy ofJudy without RAG.Judy with RAG
retrieves the top 5 most relevant reviews to answer a user’s question.
Judy therefore provides concise and accurate responses. In contrast,
Judy without RAG needs to process all the review related to a
specific outdoor trail through SQL, which can overwhelm the LLM
and result in reduced response performance.
RAG Designs: To determine the optimal value for k (the number
of the outdoor trail reviews sent to the LLM backbone), we have
evaluated impacts of different𝑘’s on efficiency and recommendation
matching. In Fig. 2(a), we have shown the performance of Judy
with the embeddings using the sentence transformer pretrained
on QA pairs (multi-qa-mpnet-base-cos-v1). We can see that𝑘 =
5 yields an average response time of 0.73s and recommendation
matching of 96%. We have also observed that when 𝑘 = 10, the
response time increases to 1.17 seconds, but the accuracy remains
the same at 96%. The increase in response time is due to processing
of more trail reviews, which adds computational overhead without
improving accuracy.
k k
(a) Sentence Transformer
pretrained on QA pairs
(b) Sentence Transformer by Distilled
Multilingual Universal Sentence Encoder
Figure 2: Sensitivity studies over 𝑘 for Judy with two sentence transformers: (a) pretrained on QA pairs; and (b) distilled multilingual
universal sentence encoder.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
We have developed Judy, a large language model (LLM) based outdoor trail recommendation chatbot based on retrieval augmented
generation (RAG). We have performed data collection and case
studies with the outdoor trails in Connecticut, US. Our data analysis and experimental results have revealed the lessons learned in
implementing RAG-based recommendation, and demonstrated the
accuracy, effectiveness, and usability of our chatbot in recommending outdoor trails.
In our future studies, we will perform more in-depth studies on:
(1) integrating more data sources (e.g., weather, social network, city
planning [5, 14, 15]) to enhance the outdoor trail recommendation
and usability; and (2) involving more user studies to gain usercentered insights into their receptivity and acceptability about
Judy.
Acknowledgment
This project is supported, in part, by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grants 2303575 and 2239897, and the Connecticut Division of Emergency Management & Homeland Security
(DEMHS) Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the funding agencies.
References
[1] Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua, Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St
John, Noah Constant, Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, et al .
2018. Universal sentence encoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11175 (2018).
[2] R Devika, Subramaniyaswamy Vairavasundaram, C Sakthi Jay Mahenthar, Vijayakumar Varadarajan, and Ketan Kotecha. 2021. A deep learning model based
on BERT and sentence transformer for semantic keyphrase extraction on big
social data. IEEE Access 9 (2021), 165252–165261.
[3] Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy,
Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. 2024.
The faiss library. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08281 (2024).
[4] S Hariprasath, Arjun Paramarthalingam, Shanmugam Sundaramurthy, and Stefano Cirillo. 2024. A Study on Word Embeddings in Local LLM-based Chatbot
Applications. In 2024 International Conference on Innovation and Intelligence for
Informatics, Computing, and Technologies (3ICT) . IEEE, 232–237.
[5] Suining He and Kang G. Shin. 2022. Distribution Prediction for Reconfiguring
Urban Dockless E-Scooter Sharing Systems. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering 34, 12 (2022), 5722–5740. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2021.3062074
[6] HuggingFace. 2025. HuggingFace Transformers (distiluse-base-multilingualcased-v2). https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/distiluse-basemultilingual-cased-v2.
[7] HuggingFace. 2025. HuggingFace Transformers (multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1).
https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1.

[TABLE page=3 index=2]
Columns: To further enhance the efficiency of the RAG-based approach, we
Row 1: To further enhance the efficiency of the RAG-based approach, we: have implemented caching for the embeddings and reviews of the
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
[8] HuggingFace. 2025. HuggingFace Transformers (multi-qa-mpnet-base-cos-v1).
https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/multi-qa-mpnet-base-cos-v1.
[9] Iustina Ivanova and Mike Wald. 2023. Recommender systems for outdoor adventure tourism sports: hiking, running and climbing. Human-Centric Intelligent
Systems 3, 3 (2023), 344–365.
[10] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir
Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive
nlp tasks. Proc. NeurIPS 33 (2020), 9459–9474.
[11] Klemen Prah. 2024. Creating vector profile graph in ArcGIS Pro based on hiking
trail tracking with AllTrails app. Dela 62 (2024), 135–155.
[12] Rails to Trails Conservancy. 2025. TrailLink: Bike, Run, Walk. https://www.
traillink.com/.
[13] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne
Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, et al. 2023. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
[14] Xi Yang, Suining He, and Mahan Tabatabaie. 2023. Equity-Aware Cross-Graph
Interactive Reinforcement Learning for Bike Station Network Expansion. InProc.
ACM SIGSPATIAL (Hamburg, Germany) (SIGSPATIAL ’23). Article 45, 12 pages.
[15] Xi Yang, Jiachen Wang, Han Song, and Suining He. 2024. Micromobility Flow
Prediction: A Bike Sharing Station-level Study via Multi-level Spatial-Temporal
Attention Neural Network. ACM SIGKDD International Workshop on Urban
Computing (UrbComp).