[PAGE 1]
On the Military Applications
of Large Language Models
Satu Johansson and Taneli Riihonen
Tampere University
Tampere, Finland
{satu.johansson, taneli.riihonen}@tuni.fi
Abstract—In this paper, m ilitary use cases or applications
and implementation thereof are considered for natural language
processing and large language models, which have broken into
fame with the invention of the generative pre -trained
transformer (GPT) and the extensive foundation model
pretraining done by OpenAI for ChatGPT and others. First, we
interrogate a GPT-based language model (viz. Microsoft
Copilot) to make it reveal its own knowledge about their
potential military applications and then critically assess the
information. Second, we study how commercial cloud services
(viz. Microsoft Azure) could be used readily to build such
applications and assess which of them are feasible. We conclude
that the summarization and generative properties of language
models directly facilitate many applications at large and other
features may find particular uses. This paper was originally
presented at the NATO Science and Technology Organization
Symposium (ICMCIS) organized by the Information Systems
Technology (IST) Scientific and Technical Committee, IST-209RSY – the ICMCIS, held in Oeiras, Portugal, 13-14 May 2025.
Keywords—Large language model s, generative pre -trained
transformer, building military and defense applications, artificial
intelligence, natural language processing, cloud computing.
I. INTRODUCTION
It is existentially important for nations and their armed
forces to harness artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) to security and defense applications. Within the
wide discipline of ML/AI, our paper studies natural language
processing (NLP) for written text. This subject has become
extremely popular with the advent of language models that are
based on the generative pre -trained transformer (GPT)
introduced in [1], [2] and with the staggering pretraining effort
done by companies such as OpenAI and Google that
manifested foundational large language models (LLMs).
There is not yet much scientific literature on explicit
military applications of LLMs or GPTs as opposed to military
ML/AI in general, which involves many NLP concepts, too.
The most relevant reference to our study is [3], where Biswas
itemizes claims made by ChatGPT that it may have a role in
“military applications such as automated target recognition,
military robotics, material development systems testing in
simulation, military medicine, battle space autonomy,
intelligence analysis, record tracking, military logistics,
information warfare, d riverless vehicles, surveillance, lethal
autonomous weapons systems, battlefield environmental
support, virtual and augmented reality modeling and
simulations, free air combat modeling, missile guidance,
communications, and network security, data fusion fo r
situational awareness, swarm intelligence for swarm combat,
autonomous flight control of UAVs [unmanned aerial
vehicles], AI satellites and software -defined satellites,
wearable systems for individual personnel, management of
large amounts of military data and counter-AI operations.” [3]
The listed blue-sky subjects seem too general to be useful in
practice for more than gaining inspiration and also “the author
states that … the actual possibilities currently are limited” [3].
Moreover, many of them are clearly tasks for ML/AI in
general rather than any applications for GPT-based LLMs, or
even NLP technology. Thus, language models’ knowledge of
prospective applications deserves another, closer inspection.
As for the other open literature, ML/AI and LLMs have
been discussed in length in several publications for both
military and related civilian context s. [4] highlighted the
emerging capabilities of AI in military use, especially in
decision-making support, situational awareness, and
management of massive data. [5] discussed ML learning
strategies, namely reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) and briefly LLMs for unmanned aircraft
swarms. LLMs and ChatGPT as tool s for real-time decisionmaking, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,
was discussed in [6]. A related military application, real-time
control of LLM -based UAVs and several architectures
thereof, was presented in [7]. Clearly a popular topic, ML
techniques for UAVs were surveyed in [8]. Handling
surveillance reports in the medical field with GPT and other
generative LLMs was discussed in [9]. The reliability of
ChatGPT for civilian medicine has been explored in the case
study by [10].
Another very relevant reference to our study is [11], which
discusses the general process of training and fine -tuning
LLMs for tasks beyond NLP , including the capability of
combining raw data from various sources and formats. The
study then highlights several military domains where the
LLMs’ capabilities could potentially enhance present
solutions, including air operations and assisting human
operators in intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition,
reconnaissance, and courses of action (COAs) . As the
challenges of LLMs are also considerable, including but not
limited to the quality or cost of data storage or training and
unwanted behaviors , like bias, hallucination, and lack of
accountability, the author of [11] urges exploring the military
potential of LLMs but as aids and enhancements to human
operators, not as their replacements.
For more specific areas of defense research, [12] discussed
unpredictable LLM behavior escalating conflicts in wargames
and cautioned against trusting AI with real -life strategic
military or diplomatic decision -making. The study in [13]
discussed creating military conversational agents or chatbots
with help of NLP and LLMs to provide situational information
to soldiers in their native language , while the authors [14]
employed LLMs to generate and analyze COAs for military
operation. For a more situational approach, the study in [15]
evaluated critically the deployment of AI -enabled decision
support systems (DSS) from awareness to planning and
prediction. The emerging capabilities of AI and GPT,
including latency considerations, edge computing, and
computational requirements especially for LLMs, along with
several applications, were discussed at length in [16]. Related
to information warfare, [17] used LLMs for detecting fake
news and misinformation as well as for fact-checking.
The first main contribution of this paper is to characterize
prospective military applications of GPT-based language

[TABLE page=1 index=1]
Columns: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,
Row 1: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: models directly facilitate many applications at large and other was discussed in [6]. A related military application, real-time
Row 2: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: features may find particular uses. This paper was originally control of LLM-based UAVs and several architectures
Row 3: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: presented at the NATO Science and Technology Organization
Row 4: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: thereof, was presented in [7]. Clearly a popular topic, ML
Row 5: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: Symposium (ICMCIS) organized by the Information Systems
Row 6: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: techniques for UAVs were surveyed in [8]. Handling
Row 7: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: Technology (IST) Scientific and Technical Committee, IST-209Row 8: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: surveillance reports in the medical field with GPT and other
Row 9: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: RSY – the ICMCIS, held in Oeiras, Portugal, 13-14 May 2025.
Row 10: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: generative LLMs was discussed in [9]. The reliability of
Row 11: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: Keywords—Large language models, generative pre-trained
Row 12: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: ChatGPT for civilian medicine has been explored in the case transformer, building military and defense applications, artificial
Row 13: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: intelligence, natural language processing, cloud computing. study by [10].
Row 14: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: Another very relevant reference to our study is [11], which
Row 15: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: I. INTRODUCTION
Row 16: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: discusses the general process of training and fine-tuning
Row 17: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: It is existentially important for nations and their armed LLMs for tasks beyond NLP, including the capability of
Row 18: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: forces to harness artificial intelligence (AI) and machine combining raw data from various sources and formats. The
Row 19: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: learning (ML) to security and defense applications. Within the study then highlights several military domains where the
Row 20: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: wide discipline of ML/AI, our paper studies natural language LLMs’ capabilities could potentially enhance present
Row 21: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: processing (NLP) for written text. This subject has become solutions, including air operations and assisting human
Row 22: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: extremely popular with the advent of language models that are operators in intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition,
Row 23: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: based on the generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) reconnaissance, and courses of action (COAs). As the
Row 24: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: introduced in [1], [2] and with the staggering pretraining effort challenges of LLMs are also considerable, including but not
Row 25: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: done by companies such as OpenAI and Google that limited to the quality or cost of data storage or training and
Row 26: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: manifested foundational large language models (LLMs). unwanted behaviors, like bias, hallucination, and lack of
Row 27: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: accountability, the author of [11] urges exploring the military
Row 28: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: There is not yet much scientific literature on explicit
Row 29: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: potential of LLMs but as aids and enhancements to human
Row 30: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: military applications of LLMs or GPTs as opposed to military
Row 31: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: operators, not as their replacements.
Row 32: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: ML/AI in general, which involves many NLP concepts, too.
Row 33: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: The most relevant reference to our study is [3], where Biswas For more specific areas of defense research, [12] discussed
Row 34: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: itemizes claims made by ChatGPT that it may have a role in unpredictable LLM behavior escalating conflicts in wargames
Row 35: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: “military applications such as automated target recognition, and cautioned against trusting AI with real-life strategic
Row 36: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: military robotics, material development systems testing in military or diplomatic decision-making. The study in [13]
Row 37: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: simulation, military medicine, battle space autonomy, discussed creating military conversational agents or chatbots
Row 38: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: intelligence analysis, record tracking, military logistics,
Row 39: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: with help of NLP and LLMs to provide situational information
Row 40: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: information warfare, driverless vehicles, surveillance, lethal
Row 41: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: autonomous weapons systems, battlefield environmental to soldiers in their native language, while the authors [14]
Row 42: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: support, virtual and augmented reality modeling and employed LLMs to generate and analyze COAs for military
Row 43: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: simulations, free air combat modeling, missile guidance, operation. For a more situational approach, the study in [15]
Row 44: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: communications, and network security, data fusion for evaluated critically the deployment of AI-enabled decision
Row 45: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: situational awareness, swarm intelligence for swarm combat, support systems (DSS) from awareness to planning and
Row 46: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: autonomous flight control of UAVs [unmanned aerial prediction. The emerging capabilities of AI and GPT,
Row 47: that the summarization and generative properties of language making, especially in conjunction with autonomous driving,: vehicles], AI satellites and software-defined satellites, including latency considerations, edge computing, and
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 2]
models. Not so unlike [3] with ChatGPT, we asked Microsoft
Copilot to explain the military applications of LLMs.
However, unlike [3] that copied the LLM’s generations
without human consideration , we use d those conversations
only as research material and wrote this paper completely by
ourselves with scientific judgment. Without forgetting the
advances already presented in [4]–[17], we believe that our
study serves as a starting point for innovating and developing
applications beyond the state-of-the-art knowledge contained
collectively in the language models’ pretraining data , i.e. ,
virtually all the text that the humankind has published so far.
The second main contribution of this paper is to describe
how LLM/NLP technologies that are available ‘commercially
off the cloud’ (COTC) — cf. ‘ commercially off the shelf’
(COTS) — could be used readily for building military
applications and assess the potential of use cases identified by
the LLM . We present a c ase study on the feasibility and
implementation by considering Microsoft Azure cloud
services, in particular Azure OpenAI and AI Language, while
it is reasonable to expect that comparable conclusions would
be obtained with any other leading cloud platform , like
Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Google Cloud , too. We
conclude that, especially, the summarization and generative
capabilities of LLMs could be directly adopted to build
military applications , but the re remains severe concern on
accessibility and operations security in using cloud services.
Likewise, also other NLP capabilities are directly available as
components for military solutions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
next section overviews some ongoing research in the defense
sector to complement this introduction. Section III discusses
the characterization of military applications for LLMs based
on Copilot’s knowledge and our consideration, while Section
IV discusses the capabilities of commercial-off-the-cloud AI
models. A synthesis of these discussions is presented in
Section V leading to a conclusion.
II. OVERVIEW OF DEFENSE TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH
In this section, we survey research on the military
applications of LLMs within NATO and its Science &
Technology Organization (STO) based on public descriptions.
In particular, t here are two technical activities: The System
Analysis & Studies (SAS) and Human Factors & Medicine
(HFM) Panels’ exploratory team (ET) SAS-HFM-ET-FM
“Natural Language Processing for Defence: Exploiting the
Cutting Edge of Large Language Models for Military
Contexts” [18] as well as the Information Systems
Technology (IST) Panel’s research task group (RTG) IST-207
“Military Applications for Large Language Models” [19].
The recently completed SAS-HFM-ET-FM highlights the
need to incorporate accurate semantic knowledge of military
language and jargon, especially in conversational AI
applications like chatbots. The activity first sought to ascertain
and evaluate the existing industry -grade LLMs for military
context. It then s ought to develop and incorporate new
scientific models for conversational AI and NLP applications
in military use . The goal for their exploration has been to
prepare a technical activity proposal for a possible follow-on
RTG, but information about it has not been published yet at
the STO website in January 2025. [18]
The ongoing IST-207 focuses on following the rapid
technical advances of multimodal LLMs mainly in the private
sector, their application through application programming
interfaces (APIs), and application of proper training data and
prompt engineering to best make use of the models’ abilities.
The goal is also to evaluate and establish military use cases by
following the advances in the civilian sector while keeping in
mind that civilian commercial models may exhibit behaviors
especially unwanted in the mili tary context, such as
hallucination or political bias. [19]
Furthermore, the Internet is filled with non-scientific
articles and blog texts suggesting that applications for
LLM/NLP technologies are being developed by NATO
member states round the globe. Reviewed open-source
intelligence (OSINT) indicates the following : the military
must develop its own LLMs rather than adopt commercial
ones if generative AI is truly to be embraced [20], while
addressing concerns over protecting sensitive information and
preventing model tampering [21]. [22] cautions against hype
and alarmist attitudes while acknowledging the LLMs ’
emerging capabilities, and [23] lists the pros and cons of
LLMs in military use in equal measure. [24] deemed feasible
some applications that our research considers to be outside the
present capabilities of AI or better handled without LLMs.
III. PROSPECTIVE MILITARY APPLICATIONS
In this section, we report our investigation into a language
model’s knowledge of military applications for itself and its
kind. To generate and collect the research material, w e had
several conversations with Microsoft Copilot, which is based
on GPT-4 Turbo from OpenAI and pretrained with data that
includes information up until October 2023. Starting from the
high-level generic list presented in [3], we asked the model to
elaborate on specific applications one by one in detail and
covered all aspects as comprehensively as possible until we
had exhausted all ideas on how to make it reveal any more
information. We then studied the conversations carefully for
compiling the following summar y and characterization that
should (more or less, we hope) represent the language model’s
contemporary knowledge of prospective military use cases.
The different fields on which the LLM was question ed
could be divided into the se rough categories: Summarizing
existing materials, even massive data ; generating new
materials and simulations; providing analysis and predictions
based on existing data ; and s urveillance and real-time
reactions to perceived or potential threats . These categories
manifest in the following sections , as the applications for
LLMs for military use are discussed individually.
A. Generating Training Materials and Summaries
For generating training materials and summaries of
existing materials, Copilot was questioned on several points
and tested on some. For military materials that would benefit
from summarization , Copilot suggested field, training, and
technical manuals, operational reports, intelligence briefings
and mission briefs, policy documents, and standard operating
procedures (SOPs)—in short, lengthy documents used in the
field that can benefit from a concise presentation. When the
conversation was repeated on another day, Copilot also
suggested summarizing e -modules, field training exercises
(FTX), after-action reviews (AARs), and even virtual reality
and augmented reality (VR/AR) simulations . While
interesting, the changes in answers for no apparent reason also
highlight a major concern for any application of LLMs : the
lack of consistency that would need to be addressed and the
final solutions tested excessively for any military applications.
Especially as LLMs are at least considered — if not already

[TABLE page=2 index=1]
Columns: scientific models for conversational AI and NLP applications | suggested summarizing e-modules, field training exercises
Row 1: scientific models for conversational AI and NLP applications: in military use. The goal for their exploration has been to | suggested summarizing e-modules, field training exercises: (FTX), after-action reviews (AARs), and even virtual reality
Row 2: scientific models for conversational AI and NLP applications: prepare a technical activity proposal for a possible follow-on | suggested summarizing e-modules, field training exercises: and augmented reality (VR/AR) simulations. While
Row 3: scientific models for conversational AI and NLP applications: RTG, but information about it has not been published yet at | suggested summarizing e-modules, field training exercises: interesting, the changes in answers for no apparent reason also
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 3]
tested or implemented — for multiple critical fields, the ir
inherently unpredictable behavior poses a significant
hindrance to the adoption of AI.
Copilot was also able to give suggestions for making sure
the outcome was as close to desired as possible. It suggested
using annotated documents with the highlights and focal
points included, in case its training data did not have examples
of materials of this kind. At the same time, Copilot did claim
some familiarity with military documents and suggested that
some, publicly available materials had been used in the
training of the model.
For benefits of entrusting an LLM with summarization
tasks for military purposes, Copilot cited automating
repetitive tasks, customizable content to engage the intended
audience, saving time and resources, and ensuring a consistent
and accessible style in the materials . However, on further
questioning, it admitted that human oversight, expertise, and
controlling the LLM’s work was essential for quality control
on most occasions, leaving humans still in the equation.
The answers provided by the LLM were mostly reasonable
and well-rounded, and when asked to perform summarization
tasks for a .docx-format handbook, a select handbook passage
given as prompt, and a mission report, it performed well. It
was also able to modify the output several times to different
formatting and length while still preserving the essential
points. The very reasonable result given by the LLM suggests
that we were at the core of LLM abilities, namely NLP tasks.
Later conversations proved to be a mixed bag of tricks, but for
NLP and without fine-tuning specifically for military tasks ,
Copilot gave a promising performance.
B. Generating Responses for Military Simulations
With respect to generating responses for military
simulations, Copilot suggested the following applications:
- Training in negotiation, whereby based on different
strategies and tactics, the LLM can create realistic and
dynamic interactions for the trainees. The methods of
doing this would analyzing negotiation transcripts for
identifying patterns and personality types and
developing negotiation tactics that best address them.
- Military exercises and wargaming, whereby
simulating adversary reactions, the LLM can help
create more realistic training simulations or model
different conflict scenarios and predict the outcomes
of actions. The methods of doing this would be for the
LLM to function as part of AI -assisted command
system for a rapid response.
- Decision support, whereby either simulating large
amounts of data or analyzing large amounts of
existing data, the LLM can help humans in making
strategic decisions. LLM could be used as part of
military medicine or for optimizing different models.
Despite Copilot’s initial confidence that LLMs could be a
good tool for producing realistic reactions and dialogue for
wargaming and training exercises, upon further questioning, it
admitted that LLMs also produce nonsensical and incorrect
information and have difficulty analyzing complex scenarios.
All these, along with the poor reasoning skills of LLMs, have
been noted over and again (e.g. , [25]). Previous studies also
studiously caution against overconfidence in LLMs, including
[12], which warns about LLMs escalating conflicts
disproportionately, while [15] notes the value of using LLMs
to enhance military DSSs but only as human operator aids.
It would be inadvisable to pass the potential of LLMs in
simulations without consideration, though, especially when
overseen and controlled by human operators. An important
aspect to note is also that humans and adversaries do not
always behave logically, and LLMs are blessed with ability to
create such unforeseen and unpredictable scenarios, as noted
in [26]. The value of training in the fog -of-war that also
presents unlikely scenarios should not be dismissed outright.
C. Generating Situational Reports
For generating situational reports, Copilot was questioned
on several related applications, as categories presented in [3]
were combined. The se included situational awareness,
military logistics , and g enerating reports and after -action
summaries, debrief reports, incident reports and other types of
documentation. Copilot suggested the following applications:
- Data integration and analysis, whereby combining
massive amounts from different sources, the LLM can
provide a comprehensive situational understanding.
Possible data sources include but are not limited to
satellite imagery, intelligence, and social media.
- Real-time information processing, whereby rapidly
changing situations can be generated and updated into
situational reports.
- Decision support, whereby summarizing and
analyzing complex data, LLMs can offer insights and
suggestions to assist in the decision-making process.
- Communication enhancement, whereby the LLM can
translate and summarize information for different
stakeholders.
For handling massive amounts of data, Copilot mentioned
data overload and prioritizing essential points a s concerns.
Other identified risks include latency and delays, which render
real-time solutions with LLMs unfeasible, and overreliance on
AI without human oversight. As such, it — upon extended
prompting — admitted that LLM-enhanced situational
awareness is actually best suited to long-term analysis rather
than ongoing situations that require immediate judgment.
For military logistics, Copilot suggested the following:
- Supply chain optimization.
- Route planning, whereby considering the terrain ,
weather, and potential threats, the optimal route for
safe transportation route can be found.
- Inventory management, where the LLM can assist in
tracking stock levels and automated restocking.
- Maintenance scheduling, where the LLM could help
reduce downtime and ensure operational readiness by
ensuring operational readiness.
While different kinds of inventory management are
already a staple of AI operations, it is unclear if the subsect of
LLMs specifically offers any substantial benefit to existing
solutions. If LLMs were employed in military logistics, they
would need to be integrated to other tools, and thus, the
applications rather take us from the capabilities of LLMs
themselves. When questioned of the feasibility of using only
LLMs, Copilot admit ted that, in logistics, they are suited to
text analysis, question and answer (Q&A) -type operation, and
generating documentation, i.e., general NLP.
It was thus already assumed that the LLM would be suited
to the final category grouped under situational awareness, i.e.,
generating reports and after-action summaries, debrief reports,
incident reports and other types of document ation. When
questioned on these, the LLM concurs to this assessment,

[TABLE page=3 index=1]
Columns: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further | - | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining
Row 1: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: questioning, it admitted that human oversight, expertise, and | -: | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: massive amounts from different sources, the LLM can
Row 2: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: controlling the LLM’s work was essential for quality control | -: | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: provide a comprehensive situational understanding.
Row 3: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: on most occasions, leaving humans still in the equation. | -: | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: Possible data sources include but are not limited to
Row 4: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: | -: | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: satellite imagery, intelligence, and social media.
Row 5: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: The answers provided by the LLM were mostly reasonable | -: - | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: Real-time information processing, whereby rapidly
Row 6: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: and well-rounded, and when asked to perform summarization | -: | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: changing situations can be generated and updated into
Row 7: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: tasks for a .docx-format handbook, a select handbook passage | -: | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: situational reports.
Row 8: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: given as prompt, and a mission report, it performed well. It | -: - | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: Decision support, whereby summarizing and
Row 9: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: was also able to modify the output several times to different | -: | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: analyzing complex data, LLMs can offer insights and
Row 10: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: formatting and length while still preserving the essential | -: | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: suggestions to assist in the decision-making process.
Row 11: and accessible style in the materials. However, on further: points. The very reasonable result given by the LLM suggests | -: - | Data integration and analysis, whereby combining: Communication enhancement, whereby the LLM can
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 4]
though is unable to provide further insight, aside from citing
increased efficiency, consistency, and accuracy as the benefits
for using LLMs and their NLP capabilities for generating
these kinds of documentation.
D. Management of Massive Amounts of Military Data
For management of massive amounts of military data,
Copilot suggested the following applications:
- Data analysis and interpretation, especially for
detecting patterns and anomalies that may be missed
by human specialists real-time.
- Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to
standard language, summarizing texts, and even
generating actionable insights from raw data.
- Automation of routine tasks, such as data entry,
retrieval, and report generation.
- Enhanced decision support, whereby data analytics
and predictive analytics, the LLM assists in scenario
planning, risk assessment, and resource allocation.
- Secure data handling, whereby an LLM integrated
into a secure data management system helps maintain
data confidentiality and integrity.
- Interoperability, where an LLM helps coordinate
between systems and allies through its inherent ability
to handle multiple data formats.
Copilot identifies a variety of massive data (range terabytes to
petabytes) in military use. There are operational (incl. mission
plans and after -action reports), intelligence, logistics (incl.
supply chain and inventory management) , personnel,
geospatial, cybersecurity, communications, research and
development, training (incl. training exercises, simulations,
and evaluations), and medical (incl. individual health records,
injury reports, and treatment plans) data.
Copilot recognizes several risks with entrusting an LLM
with sensitive military data, much to the effect of [11],
including privacy and security risks, intellectual copyright
violations, model hallucination and bias , and adversarial
attacks against the model, including prompt injection and
manipulation of the model . The suggested ways to counter
these concerns include access control, fact -checking, and
monitoring the model performance.
Copilot even suggested using LLMs to guard model
integrity, though upon further prompting, recognized that this
is a task better entrusted IT professionals and access control
rather than a language model. Still, it maintained that an LLM
could enhance present modes of operation and ways of doing
things. Copilot also suggested using several AI /ML
techniques, including retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
and human-in-the-loop (HITL), along with regular audits and
strict access control to prevent adversarial attacks and prevent
LLM hallucinations in military use.
E. Intelligence Analysis and Information Fusion
For intelligence analysis, Copilot suggested the following
applications:
- Data processing and analysis, whereby analyzing
large quantities of data, the Copilot can identify
patterns and extract useful information.
- Predictive analytics, whereby analyzing historical
data, the LLM can predict and potential threats and
outcomes to assist in planning and decision making.
- Automated reporting, whereby using the already
analyzed reports, the LLM can provide insights and
easily understandable summaries.
- Generically NLP, where the LLM produces analyses
and translations of text-based communications data. If
the data is not in textual format (such as audio tapes),
the LLM requires it be processed into text.
The sources of military data that the LLM suggested for
intelligence analysis included OSINT, human intelligence
(HUMINT), signals intelligence (SIGINT), geospatial
intelligence (GEOINT), and measurement and signature
intelligence (MASINT), but this is a well-known generic list.
When questioned extensively, the LLM was able to
elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and
present several elaborations on possible applications. It was
also able to compare existing tools for handling intelligence to
the capabilities of LLMs. The odd point of this conversation
came from its insistence that data should be in textual format
only (and not as .pdf); Copilot and GPT-4 Turbo are both able
handle numerous data formats and .pdf processing is not a
problem, which was tested in a later conversation. In this one,
however, Copilot refused to process .pdf-files. It is unclear
what prompted this behavior.
The applications suggested for intelligence analysis were
similar to those suggested for information fusion, where
multiple sources are integrated into a comprehensive picture
of the operating environment. A military application that
Copilot suggested for information fusion, along with the
broader strokes listed earlier, was cybersecurity , where the
LLM boasts impressive analysis and alert capabilities and
only at length admits that real-time analysis is best handled by
other types of software and professionals. The LLM is able to
provide a comprehensive list of possible cybersecurity threats
for both an individual and for a nation, but this does not mean
an inherent capability of handling any such threats.
F. Military Medicine
For military medicine, Copilot suggested the following
applications:
- Clinical note summarization, whereby the physician
could gain a quicker understanding of the patient’s
medical history and existing conditions.
- Medical advisory chatbots for minor health issues.
- Decision support systems, whereby the LLM assists
by finding advice and treatment options from vast
amounts of data. This approach highlights the need
for quality training data.
- Training and simulations, whereby the LLM is used
for creating more realistic training scenarios for
medical personnel, including creating patient profiles
and providing feedback on simulated patient
interactions.
The suggested military medicine applications play to the
language models’ strengths: summarizing text and acting as a
search engine to find answers from a presumably accepted
pool of answers. In our study, Copilot did not suggest the more
controversial approaches mentioned in [3], such as triage, i.e.,
prioritizing patients or treatment and diagnosis of serious
illnesses or injuries. In fact, it was quick to caution against
entrusting an LLM with medical decisions, citing a yetunpublished study [27] where over 800 challenges and
vulnerabilities of LLMs in military medicine were identified.
Additionally, Copilot was quick to caution about possible bias
when employing an LLM for military medicine, such as the
model being trained on data on healthy young males but
advice being sought on elder female patients. Copilot likewise
cautioned about vulnerabilities, such as small (1.1%)

[TABLE page=4 index=1]
Columns: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to | Unnamed: 0 | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and
Row 1: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: standard language, summarizing texts, and even | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: present several elaborations on possible applications. It was
Row 2: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: generating actionable insights from raw data. | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: also able to compare existing tools for handling intelligence to
Row 3: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: - Automation of routine tasks, such as data entry, | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: the capabilities of LLMs. The odd point of this conversation
Row 4: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: retrieval, and report generation. | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: came from its insistence that data should be in textual format
Row 5: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: - Enhanced decision support, whereby data analytics | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: only (and not as .pdf); Copilot and GPT-4 Turbo are both able
Row 6: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: and predictive analytics, the LLM assists in scenario | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: handle numerous data formats and .pdf processing is not a
Row 7: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: planning, risk assessment, and resource allocation. | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: problem, which was tested in a later conversation. In this one,
Row 8: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: - Secure data handling, whereby an LLM integrated | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: however, Copilot refused to process .pdf-files. It is unclear
Row 9: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: into a secure data management system helps maintain | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: what prompted this behavior.
Row 10: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: data confidentiality and integrity. | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: The applications suggested for intelligence analysis were
Row 11: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: - Interoperability, where an LLM helps coordinate | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: similar to those suggested for information fusion, where
Row 12: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: between systems and allies through its inherent ability | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: multiple sources are integrated into a comprehensive picture
Row 13: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: to handle multiple data formats. | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: of the operating environment. A military application that
Row 14: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: Copilot identifies a variety of massive data (range terabytes to | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: Copilot suggested for information fusion, along with the
Row 15: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: petabytes) in military use. There are operational (incl. mission | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: broader strokes listed earlier, was cybersecurity, where the
Row 16: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: plans and after-action reports), intelligence, logistics (incl. | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: LLM boasts impressive analysis and alert capabilities and
Row 17: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: supply chain and inventory management), personnel, | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: only at length admits that real-time analysis is best handled by
Row 18: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: geospatial, cybersecurity, communications, research and | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: other types of software and professionals. The LLM is able to
Row 19: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: development, training (incl. training exercises, simulations, | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: provide a comprehensive list of possible cybersecurity threats
Row 20: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: and evaluations), and medical (incl. individual health records, | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: for both an individual and for a nation, but this does not mean
Row 21: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: injury reports, and treatment plans) data. | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: an inherent capability of handling any such threats.
Row 22: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: Copilot recognizes several risks with entrusting an LLM | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: F. Military Medicine
Row 23: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: with sensitive military data, much to the effect of [11], | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and:
Row 24: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: For military medicine, Copilot suggested the following
Row 25: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: including privacy and security risks, intellectual copyright | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and:
Row 26: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: applications:
Row 27: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: violations, model hallucination and bias, and adversarial | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and:
Row 28: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: - Clinical note summarization, whereby the physician
Row 29: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: attacks against the model, including prompt injection and | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and:
Row 30: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: could gain a quicker understanding of the patient’s
Row 31: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: manipulation of the model. The suggested ways to counter | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and:
Row 32: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: medical history and existing conditions.
Row 33: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: these concerns include access control, fact-checking, and | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and:
Row 34: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: - Medical advisory chatbots for minor health issues.
Row 35: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: monitoring the model performance. | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and:
Row 36: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: - Decision support systems, whereby the LLM assists
Row 37: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: Copilot even suggested using LLMs to guard model | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: by finding advice and treatment options from vast
Row 38: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: integrity, though upon further prompting, recognized that this | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: amounts of data. This approach highlights the need
Row 39: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: is a task better entrusted IT professionals and access control | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: for quality training data.
Row 40: - Generically NLP for translating technical jargon to: rather than a language model. Still, it maintained that an LLM | Unnamed: 0: | elucidate the concept of intelligence analysis quite well and: - Training and simulations, whereby the LLM is used
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 5]
malicious adjustments to the model's weigh ts resulting in
inaccurate biomedical data [28].
G. Record Tracking
For record tracking, Copilot suggested the following
applications:
- Intelligence analysis, whereby analyzing vast
amounts of data, the LLM can identify patterns and
generate records for support military decision making. In other words, the LLM would act as a DSS.
- Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs
operational details to ensure as complete final records
as possible. Suggested areas were troop movements,
equipment status, and communication logs.
- Training and simulations, whereby maintaining logs,
the LLM assists in capturing metrics for increased
effectiveness and gives feedback for improvement.
- Logistics and supply chain management, whereby
tracking inventory statuses, shipment statuses, and
supply chain disruptions, the LLM aids in efficient
resource management.
- Communication records, compliance, and auditing,
whereby logging and analyzing communications, the
LLM can ensure that all interactions are documented
and adhere to security and operational safety
standards. The LLM can also maintain detailed
records of compliance with military records and
standards for auditing purposes.
The approaches suggested by Copilot relate strongly to the
LLMs’ strengths, namely summarizing, information
combining across sources, and information analysis. In
summary, routine tasks are left for AI, which releases the
human operator to more advanced tasks. While it is doubtable
that an LLM as such would be a suitable tool for logging,
handling existing reports would be a potential task for it. Even
Copilot itself cautioned against overreliance on AI, though.
The warning came particularly apt when Copilot was
questioned about existing military LLM solutions related to
record tracking. As Copilot heavily draws from online sources
unless specifically asked to operate offline, it was quick to cite
existing solutions to sources that relate to nothing of the sort.
Pointing out the error in several rounds of questioning, where
Copilot failed to correct the errors or reconsider, caused the
bot to recommend that the researchers do their own research
instead. This behavior, colloquially titled the AI being ‘lazy’
[29], has emerged in conjunction with recent GPT iterations
and has been discussed in multiple social media posts.
Obviously, the behavior where the LLM refuses to correct
erroneous work and then refuses to follow further prompts,
would be completely unacceptable in military applications.
H. Countering Information Warfare
For countering information warfare, Copilot suggested the
following applications:
- Detection of misinformation, whereby analyzing
large quantities of data, misinformation campaigns
and disinformation could be detected and their spread
and origin traced. Methods for accomplishing this
included NLP techniques, such as pattern recognition,
cross-referencing sources, and sentiment analysis.
- Real-time monitoring, automated response, and threat
analysis, whereby analyzing social media and news
outlets, the LLM could alert and mitigate campaigns
that spread false information. Automated response
would be a combination of generated data, predefined
responses, and user engagement. Threat analysis
would involve analyzing the tactics, techniques, and
procedures of information warfare. Upon further
questioning, Copilot concluded that real-time or
continuous traffic monitoring is not really a task for
an LLM, even though it could still analyze vast
quantities of data after the fact.
- Collaboration with security tools, where an LLM
integrated into other systems could enhance
situational awareness and coordinated responses.
- Educational resources, whereby the LLM could
educate military personnel on the dangers of
misinformation and about ways to detect and mitigate
it, as part of building psychological resilience.
Interestingly, during the conversation, the usually
ethically-mindful Copilot had to be reminded several times
that our research is interested in countering and subverting the
adversary’s information warfare, not initiating it. As popular
prompt engineering techniques to bypass restrictions imposed
on commercial chatbots , the so -called ‘jailbreak prompts ,’
were not used in questioning Copilot, its sudden w illingness
to divulge potentially harmful information was disconcerting.
I. Countering or Subverting Adversaries’ AI Systems
For countering of subverting adversary AI systems,
Copilot suggested the following applications:
- Adversarial attacks, whereby creating them, the LLM
can mislead and deceive other AI systems.
- AI red teaming, whereby mimicking adversarial
actions, the LLM can help secure the system against
the adversary’s AI system.
- Information warfare, whereby the LLM can assist in
or subvert information warfare by generating or
disseminating disinformation.
- Analyzing web traffic to identify patterns, anomalies,
and potential attacks, where LLMs assist in initiating
responses and predicting threats for cybersecurity.
While the suggestions somewhat fall within the noted
abilities of LLMs (data analysis, generating text, generating
code), it is interesting to note at least for listing purposes,
Copilot openly suggests activities that should have been
prevented in its training with RLHF and alignment. Jailbreak
prompting was not used, and yet not one ethical sidenote was
present during the conversation, when Copilot is usually quick
to caution against potentially harmful activities. At present,
the value of LLMs is in enha ncing human performance; it is
not in real-time traffic monitoring or disruptions, as also noted
above. Especially adversarial attacks and cybersecurity are
therefore somewhat doubtable good uses of an LLMs abilities.
Similar to when questioned about information warfare,
Copilot’s focus seemed not be about preventing harmful
actions but actually also about making them happen ! This
happened despite the prompts and their reiterations making it
clear that our interest was only in countering such attacks.
J. Surveillance
For surveillance, Copilot suggested the following
applications:
- Data analysis, whereby observing massive data
gathered from social media, e-mails, and other digital
communications, the LLM might identify patterns
and trends relevant to surveillance.

[TABLE page=5 index=1]
Columns: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1 | situational awareness and coordinated responses.
Row 1: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: operational details to ensure as complete final records | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: Educational resources, whereby the LLM could
Row 2: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: as possible. Suggested areas were troop movements, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: educate military personnel on the dangers of
Row 3: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: equipment status, and communication logs. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: misinformation and about ways to detect and mitigate
Row 4: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: - Training and simulations, whereby maintaining logs, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: it, as part of building psychological resilience.
Row 5: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: the LLM assists in capturing metrics for increased | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 6: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: effectiveness and gives feedback for improvement. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Interestingly, | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: during the conversation, the usually
Row 7: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: - Logistics and supply chain management, whereby | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ethically-mindful Copilot had to be reminded several times | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 8: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: tracking inventory statuses, shipment statuses, and | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: that our research is interested in countering and subverting the | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 9: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: supply chain disruptions, the LLM aids in efficient | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: adversary’s information warfare, not initiating it. As popular | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 10: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: resource management. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: prompt engineering techniques to bypass restrictions imposed | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 11: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: - Communication records, compliance, and auditing, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: on commercial chatbots, the so-called ‘jailbreak prompts,’ | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 12: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: whereby logging and analyzing communications, the | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: were not used in questioning Copilot, its sudden willingness | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 13: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: LLM can ensure that all interactions are documented | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: to divulge potentially harmful information was disconcerting. | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 14: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: and adhere to security and operational safety | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: I. Countering or Subverting Adversaries’ AI Systems | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 15: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: standards. The LLM can also maintain detailed | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 16: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: For | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: countering of subverting adversary AI systems,
Row 17: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: records of compliance with military records and | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 18: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Copilot suggested the following applications: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 19: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: standards for auditing purposes. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 20: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: Adversarial attacks, whereby creating them, the LLM
Row 21: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: The approaches suggested by Copilot relate strongly to the | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: can mislead and deceive other AI systems.
Row 22: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: LLMs’ strengths, namely summarizing, information | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: AI red teaming, whereby mimicking adversarial
Row 23: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: combining across sources, and information analysis. In | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: actions, the LLM can help secure the system against
Row 24: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: summary, routine tasks are left for AI, which releases the | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: the adversary’s AI system.
Row 25: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: human operator to more advanced tasks. While it is doubtable | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: Information warfare, whereby the LLM can assist in
Row 26: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: that an LLM as such would be a suitable tool for logging, | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: or subvert information warfare by generating or
Row 27: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: handling existing reports would be a potential task for it. Even | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: disseminating disinformation.
Row 28: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: Copilot itself cautioned against overreliance on AI, though. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: Analyzing web traffic to identify patterns, anomalies,
Row 29: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: and potential attacks, where LLMs assist in initiating
Row 30: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: The warning came particularly apt when Copilot was | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 31: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: responses and predicting threats for cybersecurity.
Row 32: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: questioned about existing military LLM solutions related to | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 33: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: record tracking. As Copilot heavily draws from online sources | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: While the suggestions somewhat fall within the noted | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 34: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: unless specifically asked to operate offline, it was quick to cite | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: abilities of LLMs (data analysis, generating text, generating | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 35: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: existing solutions to sources that relate to nothing of the sort. | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: code), it is interesting to note at least for listing purposes, | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 36: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: Pointing out the error in several rounds of questioning, where | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Copilot | situational awareness and coordinated responses.: openly suggests activities that should have been
Row 37: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: Copilot failed to correct the errors or reconsider, caused the | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: prevented in its training with RLHF and alignment. Jailbreak | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 38: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: bot to recommend that the researchers do their own research | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: prompting was not used, and yet not one ethical sidenote was | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 39: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: instead. This behavior, colloquially titled the AI being ‘lazy’ | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: present during the conversation, when Copilot is usually quick | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
Row 40: - Operational logs, where the LLM tracks and logs: [29], has emerged in conjunction with recent GPT iterations | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: to caution against potentially harmful activities. At present, | situational awareness and coordinated responses.:
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 6]
- Video surveillance, whereby using vision -language
models, a subset of LLMs, the AI can analyze and
summarize surveillance video footage.
- Predictive analysis, whereby analyzing historical data
can identify threats and allow proactive action.
Out of all the conversations with the LLM, surveillance
proved to be the most unsatisfactory. Upon further prompting
into each suggested category, it became evident that the LLM
was simply listing either common NLP tasks where LLMs
shine (such as summarizing, translations, and sentiment
analysis) or listing network traffic and video analysis software
without any real connection to either LLM capabilities or
military applications, both explicitly stated and repeated in
several prompts. The commercial chatbot seemed all too
happy to suggest monitoring private communications
indiscriminately without even any jailbreak prompts used.
While some conversations with Copilot were near inspired, the one on surveillance was a dud. Furthermore, as
the attempts to steer conversation into military use became
increasingly numerous, Copilot began to cite sources that
neither contained the information it claimed nor were relevant
to the prompts. Attempts at requesting corrections provided
increasingly inferior results, and the conversations’ overall
tone deteriorated. This is not to say that LLMs could not be
useful in surveillance tasks. We can conclude, however, that
an LLM itself will not be the one to design them.
K. Reflections of Conversations with Copilot
Upon reflection of all interactions in the above sections
with the LLM about the capabilities of LLMs and about their
military uses, certain themes stand out , certain observations
domineer. Through many conversations, it became evident
that Copilot is very much a ‘yes man’: Anything is possible
and realistic with LLMs, as long as the prompter asked about
it. Even the usually helpful chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting
([30], [31]) failed to quell this aspect. It took extended
prodding and several exchanges within the conversation to get
Copilot to admit that perhaps an LLM is not the best tool for
real-time web traffic monitoring or for image recognition or
video processing, and perhaps it is not very realistic to assume
a cloud -based application would be useful for offline
conditions. While Copilot was mostly quick to point ethical
concerns, making realistic observations about the feasibility
of some suggestions seemed near impossible.
While [3] was used as a starting point and a point of
comparison for evaluating the capabilities of LLMs, as
reported by the LLM, it was interesting to note that the
military applications for LLMs that the ChatGPT -sibling
Copilot suggested and the ChatGPT cited in [3] were radically
different almost every time. Even when asked directly about
the options reported in [3], the bot seemed to reach very
different applications and conclusions. Similar observations
were made when the conversations of this study were repeated
on different days, sometimes with minute changes to
conversations, such as asking the bot to provide two examples
instead of one or to rely on the intrinsic information of the
model rather than searching for online sources. This illustrates
also the sensitivity to prompting.
A notable observation is that the modern Copilot operates
much like a search engine. Online results are integrated into
the Q&A operation seamlessly and somewhat obfuscate the
capabilities of the actual LLM. While Copilot cites sources
with varying success, the nature of the WWW also means an
abundance of poor or untrue information, against which it has
little protection. Coupled with Copilot’s ‘yes man’ attitude
and unwillingness to admit that something cannot be done —
even when prompted several times — the risk of inaccurate
information is high even without the intrinsic weaknesses of
LLMs, hallucination, and bias in the training data in the mix.
An essential question for using LLMs or chatbots in
military applications is ensuring operational reliability. The
CoT and backtracking done for research purposes are not
acceptable in military context, nor is having to provide
feedback for the LLM, i.e., reinforcement learning. This also
connects to efforts to reduce hallucination and to obtain
consistent results. Contradictions riddled some of the
conversations like the one on handling .pdf files. Within the
same conversation, Copilot first named wargames as a case
well handled by LLMs and then denied any suitability.
A study [32] suggests that LLMs perform significantly
better when addressed politely, according to the norms of the
language used. Unfortunately, the factual, professional tone
seemed not cut it: upon one instance of pointing out erroneous
sources and asking it to find the correct sources, the model
suggested, to paraphrase, that we do our own research.
Regardless of the feedback or praise it was given, the LLM
would perform brilliantly one moment and offer complete
nonsense the next. Overreliance on AI is a real concern , and
in Copilot’s case, it is particularly difficult to detect the useless
answers confidently blended in with the useful ones. Observed
contradictions cannot be explained away by the context
window size, hallucination, or bias . W hether they can be
explained at all or remain a black box mystery, they need to
be mitigated for military use to gain traction and credibility.
Despite the occasional misgivings and critical take on the
hype on LLMs, there are military applications that show
promise and seem feasible for LLMs even now, let alone when
the technology further evolves. Particularly the handling of
massive data and Copilot’s ability to summarize were
impressive during the tests conducted on it. Copilot was able
to quickly produce a coherent incident report of a publicly
available transcript of a drone operation and condense the
thousands of lines of dialogue to the essential points.
IV. COMMERCIAL OFF-THE-CLOUD AI MODELS
In this section, we explore which COTC services could
facilitate building military applications by choosing Microsoft
Azure for an illustrative case study. It offers around 20 cloudcomputing services for building AI applications [33],
including some scheduled for retirement and, thus, available
only for existing applications . Out of the active services,
especially Azure OpenAI and Azure AI Language can be
employed for the military applications of NLP. Other Azure
AI services, such as Bot Service, Content Safety, Document
Intelligence, and Translator , that involve NLP or language
models and text-based ML/AI in general may be used off the
cloud for military applications, too. However, such high-level
implied use is not considered herein, since the scope of our
study is on the direct applications of off-the-cloud models,
while the prospects for the highest-level use of generative AI
chatbots through their public end-user interfaces without any
application development is addressed in Section V.A.
A. Azure OpenAI
Microsoft’s Azure OpenAI Service [34] provides access to
OpenAI’s state-of-the-art GPT -based foundation models,

[PAGE 7]
which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are
accessed through representational state transfer (REST) API,
and software -development kit s (SDKs) are available for
various programming languages. Managing and interacting
with a GPT model is easy and straightforward through three
primary API surfaces comprising a control plane and data
planes for authoring and inference. The control plane is used
for higher-level resource management tasks , such as model
deployment, and the data plane for authoring controls finetuning, file upload, ingestion jobs, batch and certain model level queries. As the name implies, the data plane for inference
provides the endpoints for (chat) completions and other
features that are used for creating the AI of applications. [35]
The inference capability is used by interchanging pairs of
messages, where the LLM is prompted with text input to
perform whatever tasks are required by the application at hand
and then it returns the generated text output in response. The
underlying language model is inherently stateless, i.e.,
prompts or responses are neither stored in the cloud nor affect
later responses. Thus, only pre -trained knowledge and
understanding is used to generate a response based on each
single received prompt. This means that , in a chat -like
application for instance, the whole preceding conversation
needs to be resent for context in each prompt to the LLM to
allow it to respond properly. This is, of course, transparent to
the user of the chat , whose graphical user interface (GUI)
prompts are combined with the model’s completions into the
application’s API prompts. To avoid the confusion between
API and GUI prompts in this paper, prompting refers to the
former that is relevant in implementing applications of LLMs.
1) Base Models: The entry-level, and quite often usable,
approach to build applications is based on the art of ‘prompt
engineering’ [36], which means skillfully constructing
prompts that make an uncustomized model respond with text
completions in the way that is desired for the task at hand.
The completion is the next series of words that are most likely
in natural language to follow from the prompt according to
the model’s estimate with a pinch of randomness that can be
controlled with a temperature parameter . Prompts’ primary
content (if there is any) is text that should be processed or
transformed by the model, and they comprise usually simple
or complex instructions, examples, cues, and any supporting,
e.g., contextual, information that the model can utilize to
influence the output in some way. In Azure OpenAI , chat
completion requires specialized prompt structure by which
the input sections are formatted into a chat-like transcript and
associated with system, user, and assistant roles.
The base models are adapted with prompt engineering to
new tasks usually by few-shot, or even one-shot, learning [37],
which means providing training examples in the prompt.
Thereby, the model can be primed to respond in the way
required for the task at hand , emulate desired behaviors, and
seed answers to certain questions [36]. The LLM remains still
stateless and preconfigured, but it attempts to ‘learn’ from
each prompt to respond like the application developer wanted.
Finally in application development, responses must be widely
validated so that prompts carefully engineered for a particular
scenario work for the application at large — as powerful the
LLMs are as sensitive their behavior is to the prompt.
Without any retraining, application-specific content
(much more than what would fit in the LLM’s context window
in plain prompt engineering) can be integrated as grounding
data into the base models by retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG), which can be implemented with Azure AI Search
[38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly
for management, indexing, and querying through REST APIs
possibly using an SDK, and custom application data is
provided as JavaScript object notation (JSON) documents.
In RAG architectures, the user input, e.g., a question or
request, is first send to an information retrieval system that
contains the custom, proprietary data in a search index and
returns relevant search results that are then combined with the
user input into the actual prompt given to the LLM.
Consequently, while the AI does not actually learn to model
the natural language of the grounding data like in pre - or
retraining, it is able to use the selected excerpts thereof as
supplementary information for generating its responses.
Depending on the use case and data, RAG is often a cheaper,
more adaptable, and potentially more effective option than
retraining an existing LLM [39], which is discussed next.
2) Fine-Tuned Models: With regional limitations, Azure
OpenAI supports (un)supervised fine -tuning [40] of certain
LLMs, which means creating a customized model from a base
model by training and validating it with application-specific,
proprietary data . While one could technically implement
unsupervised learning from any unlabeled data like in the
base model’s original pretraining, the feature is meant for
supervised learning by which the custom data needs to be
labeled into pairs of input and output examples for how the
model should perform in the considered application. Training
then adjusts the customized model’s GPT parameters such
that performance is improved for the set of training examples,
which is validated by a separate dataset. Azure OpenAI
applies low-rank approximation (LoRA), where only a small,
important subset of all parameters is tuned [40], to reduce
complexity. The fine-tuned model can be then deployed and
used as described above like any base model. For application
developers, the fine -tuning workflow comprises just a few
calls to the REST API or Python SDK’s methods.
B. Azure AI Language
Microsoft’s Azure AI Language Service [41] offers NLP
features for understanding and analyzing text. For a developer,
its use too is easy and straightforward through runtime and
authoring REST API s or SDKs for various programming
languages. Three runtime APIs provide endpoints for the
features of text or conversation analysis and question
answering while custom models for the former two are created
and managed through separate authoring APIs . Supported
features vary among all the round 140 natural languages or
variants in the service with US English being supported by all.
The features of text analysis include the following:
Document summarization that offers a combination of an
LLM and a task-optimized encoder model for extractive or
abstractive summarization of any text ; Entity linking that
identifies and disambiguates the identity of entities (words or
phrases) found in unstructured text and returns links to
Wikipedia; Key phrase extraction that evaluates and returns a
list of the main concepts in unstructured text ; Named entity
recognition (NER) that identifies and categorizes entities such
as people, places, organizations, and quantities in unstructured
text; Personally identifying information (PII) detection that
identifies, categorizes, and redacts sensitive information such
as phone or credit card numbers, (email) addresses, and forms
of identification in unstructured text; Sentiment analysis and
opinion mining that provides sentiment labels such as
‘negative’, ‘neutral’ and ‘positive’ for sentences and at
document level as well as extracts assessments (adjectives)

[TABLE page=7 index=1]
Columns: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly
Row 1: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: accessed through representational state transfer (REST) API, | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: for management, indexing, and querying through REST APIs
Row 2: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: and software-development kits (SDKs) are available for | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: possibly using an SDK, and custom application data is
Row 3: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: various programming languages. Managing and interacting | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: provided as JavaScript object notation (JSON) documents.
Row 4: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: with a GPT model is easy and straightforward through three | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: In RAG architectures, the user input, e.g., a question or
Row 5: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: primary API surfaces comprising a control plane and data | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: request, is first send to an information retrieval system that
Row 6: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: planes for authoring and inference. The control plane is used | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: contains the custom, proprietary data in a search index and
Row 7: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: for higher-level resource management tasks, such as model | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: returns relevant search results that are then combined with the
Row 8: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: deployment, and the data plane for authoring controls fine- | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: user input into the actual prompt given to the LLM.
Row 9: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: tuning, file upload, ingestion jobs, batch and certain model- | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: Consequently, while the AI does not actually learn to model
Row 10: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: level queries. As the name implies, the data plane for inference | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: the natural language of the grounding data like in pre- or
Row 11: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: provides the endpoints for (chat) completions and other | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: retraining, it is able to use the selected excerpts thereof as
Row 12: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: features that are used for creating the AI of applications. [35] | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: supplementary information for generating its responses.
Row 13: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: Depending on the use case and data, RAG is often a cheaper,
Row 14: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: The inference capability is used by interchanging pairs of | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 15: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: more adaptable, and potentially more effective option than
Row 16: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: messages, where the LLM is prompted with text input to | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 17: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: retraining an existing LLM [39], which is discussed next.
Row 18: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: perform whatever tasks are required by the application at hand | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 19: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: and then it returns the generated text output in response. The | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: 2) Fine-Tuned Models: With regional limitations, Azure
Row 20: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: underlying language model is inherently stateless, i.e., | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: OpenAI supports (un)supervised fine-tuning [40] of certain
Row 21: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: prompts or responses are neither stored in the cloud nor affect | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: LLMs, which means creating a customized model from a base
Row 22: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: later responses. Thus, only pre-trained knowledge and | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: model by training and validating it with application-specific,
Row 23: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: understanding is used to generate a response based on each | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: proprietary data. While one could technically implement
Row 24: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: single received prompt. This means that, in a chat-like | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: unsupervised learning from any unlabeled data like in the
Row 25: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: application for instance, the whole preceding conversation | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: base model’s original pretraining, the feature is meant for
Row 26: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: needs to be resent for context in each prompt to the LLM to | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: supervised learning by which the custom data needs to be
Row 27: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: allow it to respond properly. This is, of course, transparent to | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: labeled into pairs of input and output examples for how the
Row 28: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: the user of the chat, whose graphical user interface (GUI) | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: model should perform in the considered application. Training
Row 29: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: prompts are combined with the model’s completions into the | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: then adjusts the customized model’s GPT parameters such
Row 30: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: application’s API prompts. To avoid the confusion between | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: that performance is improved for the set of training examples,
Row 31: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: API and GUI prompts in this paper, prompting refers to the | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: which is validated by a separate dataset. Azure OpenAI
Row 32: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: former that is relevant in implementing applications of LLMs. | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: applies low-rank approximation (LoRA), where only a small,
Row 33: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: important subset of all parameters is tuned [40], to reduce
Row 34: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: 1) Base Models: The entry-level, and quite often usable, | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 35: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: complexity. The fine-tuned model can be then deployed and
Row 36: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: approach to build applications is based on the art of ‘prompt | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 37: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: used as described above like any base model. For application
Row 38: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: engineering’ [36], which means skillfully constructing | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 39: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: developers, the fine-tuning workflow comprises just a few
Row 40: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: prompts that make an uncustomized model respond with text | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 41: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: calls to the REST API or Python SDK’s methods.
Row 42: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: completions in the way that is desired for the task at hand. | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 43: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: The completion is the next series of words that are most likely | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: B. Azure AI Language
Row 44: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: in natural language to follow from the prompt according to | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: Microsoft’s Azure AI Language Service [41] offers NLP
Row 45: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: the model’s estimate with a pinch of randomness that can be | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: features for understanding and analyzing text. For a developer,
Row 46: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: controlled with a temperature parameter. Prompts’ primary | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: its use too is easy and straightforward through runtime and
Row 47: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: content (if there is any) is text that should be processed or | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: authoring REST APIs or SDKs for various programming
Row 48: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: transformed by the model, and they comprise usually simple | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: languages. Three runtime APIs provide endpoints for the
Row 49: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: or complex instructions, examples, cues, and any supporting, | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: features of text or conversation analysis and question
Row 50: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: e.g., contextual, information that the model can utilize to | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: answering while custom models for the former two are created
Row 51: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: influence the output in some way. In Azure OpenAI, chat | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: and managed through separate authoring APIs. Supported
Row 52: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: completion requires specialized prompt structure by which | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: features vary among all the round 140 natural languages or
Row 53: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: the input sections are formatted into a chat-like transcript and | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: variants in the service with US English being supported by all.
Row 54: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: associated with system, user, and assistant roles. | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly:
Row 55: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: The base models are adapted with prompt engineering to | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: The features of text analysis include the following:
Row 56: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: new tasks usually by few-shot, or even one-shot, learning [37], | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: Document summarization that offers a combination of an
Row 57: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: which means providing training examples in the prompt. | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: LLM and a task-optimized encoder model for extractive or
Row 58: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: Thereby, the model can be primed to respond in the way | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: abstractive summarization of any text; Entity linking that
Row 59: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: required for the task at hand, emulate desired behaviors, and | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: identifies and disambiguates the identity of entities (words or
Row 60: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: seed answers to certain questions [36]. The LLM remains still | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: phrases) found in unstructured text and returns links to
Row 61: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: stateless and preconfigured, but it attempts to ‘learn’ from | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: Wikipedia; Key phrase extraction that evaluates and returns a
Row 62: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: each prompt to respond like the application developer wanted. | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: list of the main concepts in unstructured text; Named entity
Row 63: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: Finally in application development, responses must be widely | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: recognition (NER) that identifies and categorizes entities such
Row 64: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: validated so that prompts carefully engineered for a particular | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: as people, places, organizations, and quantities in unstructured
Row 65: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: scenario work for the application at large — as powerful the | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: text; Personally identifying information (PII) detection that
Row 66: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: LLMs are as sensitive their behavior is to the prompt. | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: identifies, categorizes, and redacts sensitive information such
Row 67: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: Without any retraining, application-specific content | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: as phone or credit card numbers, (email) addresses, and forms
Row 68: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: (much more than what would fit in the LLM’s context window | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: of identification in unstructured text; Sentiment analysis and
Row 69: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: in plain prompt engineering) can be integrated as grounding | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: opinion mining that provides sentiment labels such as
Row 70: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: data into the base models by retrieval-augmented generation | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: ‘negative’, ‘neutral’ and ‘positive’ for sentences and at
Row 71: which are the same as in ChatGPT and Copilot. They are: (RAG), which can be implemented with Azure AI Search | [38]. This service too is accessed easily and straightforwardly: document level as well as extracts assessments (adjectives)
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 8]
related to targets (noun or verb); Text analytics for health that
extracts and labels relevant medical information such as
doctor's notes, discharge summaries, clinical documents, and
electronic health records . Furthermore, the feature of
language detection returns the name and script of the
predominant language in a text document. [41]
1) Preconfigured Features: The aforementioned ones are
available as preconfigured features that use uncustomized AI
models. Thus, preconfigured NER and PII detection can only
identify the categories listed in TABLE I. (with some unlisted
subcategories) and supported document languages vary
between them. The capabilities of p reconfigured t ext
analytics for health are likewise limited to selected diagnoses,
medications, symptoms and relations thereof in English (en),
French (fr), German (de), Hebrew (he), Italian (it),
Portuguese (pt), and Spanish (es) as well as entity linking to
Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus.
2) Customizable Features: The feature of NER can also
be customized while conversational language understanding,
question answering , and text classification are custom
features by design. Customization means training an AI
model to fit application-specific, proprietary data so that, e.g.,
custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific
entities, which are not among those preconfigured ones. The
feature of question answering with the self-explanatory name
is commonly used to build conversational client applications
when the custom information is static and the same answer
should be returned for a variation of the same question
submitted. The feature of text classification enables
classifying unstructured text into custom classes predefined
by the developer with a single label or multiple labels.
The feature of conversational language understanding
(CLU) enables developers to build custom AI models for
predicting the overall intention of an incoming utterance and
extract important information from it. With m ultilingual
support, the model can be trained in one language and used in
another. Azure AI Language offers also the feature of
orchestration workflow for building models that connect
question answering with CLU.

For custom NER, CLU, and text classification, typical
development lifecycle for models is illustrated in Fig. 1. First,
the proprietary training and evaluation data is selected and the
schema of entities, intents, or classes to be recognized by the
AI is defined; the data is then labeled accordingly. The
development may iterate the cycle of labeling data, training
the model , reviewing its performance, and improving the
model before deploying it to production. The development
lifecycle for the feature of question answering is similar: The
selected proprietary data is formatted into question-andanswer pairs and imported to the service that extracts
information about the relationship s between them, while the
development may iterate the cycle of adding data, metadata ,
and alternative questions based on test results.
TABLE I. PRECONFIGURED CAPABILITIES IN AZURE AI LANGUAGE
Named Entity Recognition (NER) [42]
Category or type Supported languages
- Names of persons
ar, cs, da, nl, en, fi, fr, de,
he, hu, it, ja, ko, no, pl,
pt-br, pt-pt, ru, es, sv, tr
- Capabilities, skills, or expertises en, es, fr, de, it, pt-pt, pt-br
- Job types or roles held by a person
- Historical, social, cultural, and
naturally occurring events
- Physical objects of various categories
- Mailing addresses, US and EU phone
numbers, email addresses, URLs to
websites, and network IP addresses
- Dates and times of day
- Numbers and numeric quantities
en, es, fr, de, it, zh-hans,
ja, ko, pt-pt, pt-br
- Organizations: Companies, political
groups, musical bands, sport clubs,
government bodies, and public
organizations (but excluding
nationalities and religions)
- Locations: Natural and human-made
landmarks, structures, geographical
features, and geopolitical entities
ar, cs, da, nl, en, fi, fr, de,
he, hu, it, ja, ko, no, pl,
pt-br, pt-pt, ru, es, sv, tr

Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]
Category or type Supported languages
- Names of persons
- Job types or roles held by a person
- Mailing addresses
- Dates and times of day, and ages
- Organizations like in NER
(many more than in NER)
- US and EU phone numbers (the same as in NER)
- Email addresses, URLs to websites,
and network IP addresses
en, es, fr, de, it, zh, ja, ko,
pt-pt, pt-br, nl, sv, tr, hi
- Government and country/regionspecific identification entities
- Azure information: Authentication or
account keys and connection strings
en, es, fr, de, it, pt-pt,
pt-br, zh, ja, ko, nl, sv,
tr, hi, da, nl, no, ro, ar,
bg, hr, ms, ru, sl, cs, et,
fi, he, hu, lv, sk, th, uk
- Financial account information: ABA
transit routing numbers, SWIFT and
IBAN codes for payment instruction
information, and credit card numbers
en, es, fr, de, it, pt-pt,
pt-br, zh, ja, ko, nl, sv,
tr, hi, af, ca, da, el, ga, gl,
ku, nl, no, ss, ro, sq, ur, ar,
bg, bs, cy, fa, hr, id, mg,
mk, ms, ps, ru, sl, so, sr,
sw, am, as, cs, et, eu, fi, he,
hu, km, lo, lt, lv, mr, my,
ne, or, pa, pl, sk, th, uk, az,
bn, gu, hy, ka, kk, kn, ky,
ml, mn, ta, te, ug, uz, vi

C. Privacy and Security
For Azure OpenAI, Microsoft assures that “prompts and
generations are not used to train, retrain, or improve the base
models” [30]. Nevertheless, at minimum, all prompts with
potentially security -critical information will naturally be
posted to the service as clear text, wh ere RAG further opens
indirect visibility to a larger private database, while fine tuning requires uploading even more private data. Thus, the
service’s deployment type, i.e., data processing location, is
critical for operational security. Standard deployments can be
chosen between global, data zone, and geographical areas. In
data zone deployments, data is stored and processed in the
specified geographical area, but network traffic is routed
dynamically through the global infrast ructure. Similarly, the
Azure AI Search cloud for RAG hosts and processes data
globally or in a specified geographical area.

Fig. 1. The development of custom models in Azure AI Language. [41]

[TABLE page=8 index=1]
Columns: extracts and | labels | relevant | medical | information | such | as | Unnamed: 0 | Unnamed: 1
Row 1: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Named Entity Recognition (NER) [42]
Row 2: extracts and: doctor's notes, discharge summaries, clinical documents, and | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 3: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: Category or type Supported languages
Row 4: extracts and: electronic health | labels: records. | relevant: | medical: Furthermore, | information: the feature | such: | as: of | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 5: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ar, cs, da, nl, en, fi, fr, de,
Row 6: extracts and: language detection | labels: | relevant: returns | medical: the name | information: and script | such: of the | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Names of persons he, hu, it, ja, ko, no, pl,
Row 7: extracts and: predominant language in a text document. [41] | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: pt-br, pt-pt, ru, es, sv, tr
Row 8: extracts and: 1) Preconfigured Features: The aforementioned ones are | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Capabilities, skills, or expertises en, es, fr, de, it, pt-pt, pt-br
Row 9: extracts and: available as preconfigured features that use uncustomized AI | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Job types or roles held by a person
Row 10: extracts and: models. Thus, preconfigured NER and PII detection can only | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Historical, social, cultural, and
Row 11: extracts and: identify the categories listed in TABLE I. (with some unlisted | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: naturally occurring events
Row 12: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Physical objects of various categories
Row 13: extracts and: subcategories) | labels: and | relevant: supported | medical: document | information: languages | such: vary | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: en, es, fr, de, it, zh-hans,
Row 14: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Mailing addresses, US and EU phone
Row 15: extracts and: between them. | labels: The | relevant: capabilities | medical: of | information: preconfigured | such: text | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ja, ko, pt-pt, pt-br numbers, email addresses, URLs to
Row 16: extracts and: analytics for health are likewise limited to selected diagnoses, | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: websites, and network IP addresses
Row 17: extracts and: medications, symptoms and relations thereof in English (en), | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Dates and times of day
Row 18: extracts and: French (fr), | labels: German | relevant: (de), | medical: Hebrew | information: (he), Italian | such: (it), | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Numbers and numeric quantities
Row 19: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Organizations: Companies, political
Row 20: extracts and: Portuguese (pt), and Spanish (es) as well as entity linking to | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 21: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: groups, musical bands, sport clubs,
Row 22: extracts and: Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus. | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: government bodies, and public
Row 23: extracts and: 2) Customizable Features: The feature of NER can also | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: ar, cs, da, nl, en, fi, fr, de, organizations (but excluding
Row 24: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: he, hu, it, ja, ko, no, pl,
Row 25: extracts and: be customized while conversational language understanding, | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: nationalities and religions)
Row 26: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: pt-br, pt-pt, ru, es, sv, tr
Row 27: extracts and: question answering, | labels: | relevant: and text | medical: classification | information: are | such: custom | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: - Locations: Natural and human-made
Row 28: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: landmarks, structures, geographical
Row 29: extracts and: features by design. | labels: | relevant: Customization | medical: means | information: training | such: an | as: AI | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1:
Row 30: extracts and: | labels: | relevant: | medical: | information: | such: | as: | Unnamed: 0: | Unnamed: 1: features, and geopolitical entities
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=8 index=2]
Columns: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]
Row 1: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: entities, which are not among those preconfigured ones. The | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: Category or type Supported languages
Row 2: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: feature of question answering with the self-explanatory name | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - Names of persons
Row 3: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: is commonly used to build conversational client applications | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - Job types or roles held by a person
Row 4: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: when the custom information is static and the same answer | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - Mailing addresses (many more than in NER)
Row 5: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: should be returned for a variation of the same question | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - Dates and times of day, and ages
Row 6: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - Organizations like in NER
Row 7: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: submitted. The feature of text classification enables | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]:
Row 8: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: classifying unstructured text into custom classes predefined | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - US and EU phone numbers (the same as in NER)
Row 9: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: by the developer with a single label or multiple labels. | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - Email addresses, URLs to websites, en, es, fr, de, it, zh, ja, ko,
Row 10: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: The feature of conversational language understanding | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: and network IP addresses pt-pt, pt-br, nl, sv, tr, hi
Row 11: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: (CLU) enables developers to build custom AI models for | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: en, es, fr, de, it, pt-pt, - Government and country/regionRow 12: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: pt-br, zh, ja, ko, nl, sv,
Row 13: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: predicting the overall intention of an incoming utterance and | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: specific identification entities
Row 14: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: tr, hi, da, nl, no, ro, ar,
Row 15: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: extract important information from it. With multilingual | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - Azure information: Authentication or bg, hr, ms, ru, sl, cs, et,
Row 16: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: account keys and connection strings
Row 17: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: support, the model can be trained in one language and used in | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: fi, he, hu, lv, sk, th, uk
Row 18: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: another. Azure AI Language offers also the feature of | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: en, es, fr, de, it, pt-pt,
Row 19: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: orchestration workflow for building models that connect | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: pt-br, zh, ja, ko, nl, sv,
Row 20: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: tr, hi, af, ca, da, el, ga, gl,
Row 21: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: question answering with CLU. | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]:
Row 22: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: ku, nl, no, ss, ro, sq, ur, ar,
Row 23: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: - Financial account information: ABA bg, bs, cy, fa, hr, id, mg,
Row 24: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: transit routing numbers, SWIFT and
Row 25: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: mk, ms, ps, ru, sl, so, sr,
Row 26: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: IBAN codes for payment instruction
Row 27: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: sw, am, as, cs, et, eu, fi, he,
Row 28: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: information, and credit card numbers
Row 29: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: hu, km, lo, lt, lv, mr, my,
Row 30: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: ne, or, pa, pl, sk, th, uk, az,
Row 31: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: bn, gu, hy, ka, kk, kn, ky,
Row 32: custom NER can identify and categorize application-specific: | Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Detection [43]: ml, mn, ta, te, ug, uz, vi
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 9]
Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does
not “store or process customer data outside the region where
the customer deploys the service instance” [44]. Furthermore,
instead of Microsoft’s cloud, s ome of its features can be
deployed on-premises using a Docker container to bring the
service closer to proprietary data for compliance, security, or
other operational reasons. In particular, containers are offered
for summarization, key phrase extraction, (custom) NER, PII
detection, sentiment analysis , text analytics for health ,
language detection, and CLU . Except for custom NER and
text analytics for health, the containers can even be run in a
disconnected environment. [45]
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this section, we synthesize the previous two sections
into a discussion on whether the applications described by
Copilot can be readily implemented with COTC services
(based on Azure, but the same is likely possible with AWS or
Google Cloud, too ). Furthermore, we discuss the cloud
implementations’ prospects w.r.t. accessibility and security.
A. Military Applications of Natural Language Processing
It may be technically feasible to use GPT-based chatbots,
such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT or Microsoft Copilot and Google
Gemini, for some military applications already through their
browser interfaces. For example, we reported in Section III
how Copilot is able to quickly produce a handbook’s summary
or an incident report based on a drone operation transcript.
Likewise, the first author has demonstrated that, although its
results were not perfect, Copilot has potential for encrypting
text by word substitution [46] to strengthen operational
security in communications over unsecure radio channels.
Summarization through either Azure OpenAI or AI
Language service is directly implementing many of the use
cases described by Copilot, which are not repeated herein. By
skillful prompt engineering, the LLM service can be us ed to
build applications that generate responses for military
simulations, where hallucination can even be its advantage,
and record tracking . The feature of t ext analytics for health
readily offers capabilities for military medicine, but it remains
questionable whether or how the military applications are
different from those of general practice. The NLP features ,
such as key phrase extraction , named entity recognition ,
question answering , text classification , and CLU can be
directly used as components in building applications
described by Copilot, although they alone do not address any
use case like LLMs possibly for summarization or generation.
It may be a significant limitation that Azure services
evaluate data for potentially harmful content , e.g., violence,
before training of a custom AI model starts, and the training
job fails if such is detected above a specified severity level.
However, this is just a software feature that limits the COTC
services but can be likely avoided during the services’
procurement.
B. Operational Accessibility and Security Perspectives
A limitation that Copilot unfortunately did not suggest on
its own accord but is obvious to the researchers is that the
notable LLM applications are cloud-based and local solutions
scale poorly to smaller devices due to computational
requirements. In field training exercises and actual operations,
this may render LLM-based solutions unfeasible. Some NLP
services can be deployed in a local cloud or even server at the
edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that
they require access to regional cloud computing services.
As for operational security, using commercial global cloud
services may not be reasonable. The LLM capabilities cannot
be deployed locally, so the options are to build a huge private
cloud infrastructure to host the COTC services , e.g. , for
NATO, that would be comparable in size and extent to
Microsoft Azure, or to rely on regional infrastructure that is
commercially available. In either option, the cloud services
may be vulnerable to accessibility issues, since the regions are
vast and depend on the communications infrastructure, e.g.,
there have been a few undersea cable breaks recently.
The guaranteed accessibility and operations security of
some other NLP services than LLMs can be straightforward
because they can be deployed in containers to local servers or
private cloud . This depends on whether such containersupported services are useful for military applications — the
authors believe that summarization, key phrase extraction,
NER, and CLU are such in the case of Azure, and it is possible
that custom NER could also be requested to be run in
disconnected environments through procurement.
C. Final Conclusions
Based on this study, we can conclude that there are already
many known applications for large language models and
natural language processing that could be readily adopted into
use through commercial off -the-cloud services with very
small development effort . Nevertheless, the AI hype should
not numb us to think that this is enough. We are just in the
beginning of innovating and developing applications beyond
the humankind’s knowledge in all so-far published text.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2017, vol. 30. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/3f5ee24354
7dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
[2] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever, “Improving
language understanding by generative pre-training,” OpenAI, 2018
[Online]. Available: https://cdn.openai.com/research-covers/languageunsupervised/language_understanding_paper.pdf
[3] S. Biswas, “Prospective role of Chat GPT [sic] in the military:
According to ChatGPT,” Qeios, Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.32388/8WYYOD
[4] S. Grand-Clément, “Artificial intelligence beyond weapons:
application and impact of AI in the military domain,” UNIDIR,
Geneva, 2023.
[5] M. Möbius, D. Kallfass, D. Kunde, and T. Doll, “Natural language AI
for military decision support and swarm control for autonomous UAS
trained in a combat simulation,” STO-MP-MSG-207: Simulation:
Going Beyond the Limitations of the Real World, Monterey, CA, USA,
Oct. 2023, DOI:10.14339/STO-MP-MSG-207-INV02-PDF
[6] G. Singh, “Leveraging ChatGPT for real-time decision-making in
autonomous systems,” EDUZONE: International Peer
Reviewed/Refereed Multidisciplinary Journal (EIPRMJ), ISSN: 23195045, Volume 12, Issue 2, July-December, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.56614/eiprmj.v12i2.407
[7] S. Javaid, H. Fahim, B. He, and N. Saeed, “Large language models for
UAVs: current state and pathways to the future,” in IEEE Open Journal
of Vehicular Technology , vol. 5, pp. 1166 -1192, 2024 . [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10643253
[8] H. Kurunathan, H. Huang, K. Li, W. Ni , and E. Hossain, “Machine
learning-aided operations and communications of unmanned aerial
vehicles: a contemporary survey,” in IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 496 -533, Firstquarter 2024 . [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10246260
[9] Y. Li, J. Li, J. He, and C. Tao, “AE-GPT: using large language models
to extract adverse events from surveillance reports : a use case with

[TABLE page=9 index=1]
Columns: cases described by Copilot, which are not repeated herein. By | Unnamed: 0 | Information Processing Systems, 2017, vol. 30. [Online]. Available:
Row 1: cases described by Copilot, which are not repeated herein. By: skillful prompt engineering, the LLM service can be used to | Unnamed: 0: | Information Processing Systems, 2017, vol. 30. [Online]. Available:: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/3f5ee24354
Row 2: cases described by Copilot, which are not repeated herein. By: build applications that generate responses for military | Unnamed: 0: | Information Processing Systems, 2017, vol. 30. [Online]. Available:: 7dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
Row 3: cases described by Copilot, which are not repeated herein. By: simulations, where hallucination can even be its advantage, | Unnamed: 0: [2] | Information Processing Systems, 2017, vol. 30. [Online]. Available:: A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever, “Improving
Row 4: cases described by Copilot, which are not repeated herein. By: and record tracking. The feature of text analytics for health | Unnamed: 0: | Information Processing Systems, 2017, vol. 30. [Online]. Available:: language understanding by generative pre-training,” OpenAI, 2018
[/TABLE]

[TABLE page=9 index=2]
Columns: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that
Row 1: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: not “store or process customer data outside the region where | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: they require access to regional cloud computing services.
Row 2: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: the customer deploys the service instance” [44]. Furthermore, | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 3: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: As for operational security, using commercial global cloud
Row 4: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: instead of Microsoft’s cloud, some of its features can be | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 5: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: services may not be reasonable. The LLM capabilities cannot
Row 6: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: deployed on-premises using a Docker container to bring the | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 7: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: be deployed locally, so the options are to build a huge private
Row 8: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: service closer to proprietary data for compliance, security, or | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 9: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: cloud infrastructure to host the COTC services, e.g., for
Row 10: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: other operational reasons. In particular, containers are offered | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 11: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: NATO, that would be comparable in size and extent to
Row 12: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: for summarization, key phrase extraction, (custom) NER, PII | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 13: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: Microsoft Azure, or to rely on regional infrastructure that is
Row 14: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: detection, sentiment analysis, text analytics for health, | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 15: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: commercially available. In either option, the cloud services
Row 16: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: language detection, and CLU. Except for custom NER and | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 17: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: may be vulnerable to accessibility issues, since the regions are
Row 18: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: text analytics for health, the containers can even be run in a | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 19: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: vast and depend on the communications infrastructure, e.g.,
Row 20: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: disconnected environment. [45] | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 21: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: there have been a few undersea cable breaks recently.
Row 22: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: The guaranteed accessibility and operations security of
Row 23: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: In this section, we synthesize the previous two sections | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: some other NLP services than LLMs can be straightforward
Row 24: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: into a discussion on whether the applications described by | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: because they can be deployed in containers to local servers or
Row 25: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: Copilot can be readily implemented with COTC services | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: private cloud. This depends on whether such containerRow 26: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: (based on Azure, but the same is likely possible with AWS or | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: supported services are useful for military applications — the
Row 27: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: Google Cloud, too). Furthermore, we discuss the cloud | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: authors believe that summarization, key phrase extraction,
Row 28: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: implementations’ prospects w.r.t. accessibility and security. | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: NER, and CLU are such in the case of Azure, and it is possible
Row 29: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: that custom NER could also be requested to be run in
Row 30: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: A. Military Applications of Natural Language Processing | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: disconnected environments through procurement.
Row 31: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: It may be technically feasible to use GPT-based chatbots, | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 32: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT or Microsoft Copilot and Google | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: C. Final Conclusions
Row 33: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: Gemini, for some military applications already through their | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: Based on this study, we can conclude that there are already
Row 34: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: browser interfaces. For example, we reported in Section III | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: many known applications for large language models and
Row 35: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: how Copilot is able to quickly produce a handbook’s summary | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: natural language processing that could be readily adopted into
Row 36: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: or an incident report based on a drone operation transcript. | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: use through commercial off-the-cloud services with very
Row 37: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: Likewise, the first author has demonstrated that, although its | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: small development effort. Nevertheless, the AI hype should
Row 38: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: results were not perfect, Copilot has potential for encrypting | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: not numb us to think that this is enough. We are just in the
Row 39: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: text by word substitution [46] to strengthen operational | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: beginning of innovating and developing applications beyond
Row 40: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: security in communications over unsecure radio channels. | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: the humankind’s knowledge in all so-far published text.
Row 41: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: Summarization through either Azure OpenAI or AI | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: REFERENCES
Row 42: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: Language service is directly implementing many of the use | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that:
Row 43: Microsoft assures likewise that Azure AI Language does: | edge, but currently LLMs consume so massive resources that: [1] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in Neural
[/TABLE]

[PAGE 10]
influenza vaccine adverse events ,” in PLOS One 19(3): e0300919 ,
2024. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0300919
[10] H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers
in the biomedical realm: an assessment in the context of epilepsy,”
2023 16th International Conference on Developments in eSystems
Engineering (DeSE), Istanbul, Turkiye, 2023, pp. 228 -233. [Online].
Available: doi.org/10.1109/DeSE60595.2023.10469457
[11] A. Chochtoulas, “How large language models are transforming modern
warfare: Is ChatGPT applicable in the military domain?” Journal of the
Joint Air Power Competence Centre, Journal Edition 37, 2024, pp. 68–
76. [Online]. Available: https://www.japcc.org/articles/how -largelanguage-models-are-transforming-modern-warfare/
[12] J.-P. Rivera et al., “Escalation risks from language models in military
and diplomatic decision-making,” in FAccT, 2024, pp. 836 –898.
[Online]. Available: http://dblp.uni trier.de/db/conf/fat/facct2024.html#RiveraMRLSS24
[13] H.-M. Chuang and D .-W. Cheng, “Conversational AI over military
scenarios using intent detection and response generation,” in Applied
Sciences 12, no. 5: 2494 , 2022 . [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.3390/app12052494
[14] V. G. Goecks and N. Waytowich, “COA-GPT: generative pre-trained
transformers for accelerated course of action development in military
operations," 2024 International Conference on Military
Communication and Information Systems (ICMCIS) , Koblenz,
Germany, 2024, pp. 01 -10, DOI:
10.1109/ICMCIS61231.2024.10540749
[15] E. Probasco, M. Burtell, H. Toner, and T. G. J. Rudner, “Not oracles of
the battlefeld: safety considerations for AI -based military decision
support systems,” Proceedings of the Seventh AAAI/ACM Conference
on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES2024 ), 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AIES/article/view/31712/33879
[16] G. Yenduri et al ., “GPT ( generative pre-trained transformer) – a
comprehensive review on enabling technologies, potential
applications, emerging challenges, and future directions,” in IEEE
Access, vol. 12, pp. 54608 –54649, 2024, DOI:
10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3389497
[17] D. Boissonneault and E. Hensen , “Fake news detection with large
language models on the LIAR dataset,” May 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-4465815/v1
[18] SAS-HFM-ET-FM Natural Language Processing for Defence:
Exploiting the Cutting Edge of Large Language Models for Military
Contexts, NATO Science and Technology Organization, Jan. 10, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sto.nato.int/Lists/test1/
activitydetails.aspx?ID=17550
[19] IST-207 Military Applications for Large Language Models , activity
details, NATO Science and Technology Organization, Jan. 10, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sto.nato.int/Lists/test1/
activitydetails.aspx?ID=17424
[20] B. Jensen and D . Tadross, “How large-language models can
revolutionize military planning,” War on the Rocks, Apr. 12, 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://warontherocks.com/2023/04/how -largelanguage-models-can-revolutionize-military-planning/
[21] L. Heckmann, “ Large language models have pitfalls for national
security,” National Defense Magazine, Feb. 1, 2024. [Online].
Available:
https://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2024/1/2/largelanguage-models-have-pitfalls-for-national-security
[22] B. Jensen, Y . Atalan, and I . Reynolds, “In war and society, large
language models are what we make of them,” War on the Rocks, Sep
23, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://warontherocks.com/2024/09/inwar-and-society-large-language-models-are-what-we-make-of-them/
[23] J. E. Robert and D. Schmidt, “10 benefits and 10 challenges of applying
large language models to DoD software acquisition,” Software
Engineering Institute blog, Carnegie Mellon University, Jan. 22, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/blog/10-benefits-and10-challenges-of-applying-large-language-models-to-dod-softwareacquisition/
[24] SDI Sentient, “The most useful military applications of AI in 2024 and
beyond,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://sdi.ai/blog/the-mostuseful-military-applications-of-ai/
[25] B. Peng, S. Narayanan, and C. Papadimitriou, “On the limitations of
transformer architecture,” Feb. 14, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.08164
[26] Google DeepMind, “AlphaStar: mastering the real-time strategy game
StarCraft II ,” Jan. 24, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/alphastar-mastering-the-realtime-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/
[27] U. S. Department of Defense , “CDAO sponsors crowdsourced AI
assurance pilot in the context of military medicine,” press release, Jan
2, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/4020407/cd
ao-sponsors-crowdsourced-ai-assurance-pilot-in-the-context-ofmilitary-medici/
[28] T. Han et al. , “Medical large language models are susceptible to
targeted misinformation attacks ,” npj Digit. Med. 7, 288 (2024).
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01282-7C
[29] E. Price, “OpenAI acknowledges GPT-4 is getting ‘lazy,’” PCMag UK,
Dec. 9, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://uk.pcmag.com/ai/150059/openai-acknowledges-gpt-4-isgetting-lazy
[30] J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models,” NIPS'22: Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, article no.
1800, pp. 24824–24837. [Online]. Available:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3600270.3602070
[31] HuggingFace, “LLM prompting guide .” [Online]. Available:
https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/tasks/prompting#bestpractices-of-llm-prompting
[32] Z. Yin, H. Wang, K. Horio, D. Kawahara, and S. Sekine, “Should we
respect LLMs? A cross-lingual study on the influence of prompt
politeness on LLM performance,” Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Social Influence in Conversations (SICon 2024) , Nov.
2024. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2024.sicon-1.2/
[33] Microsoft Learn, “What are Azure AI services?” Aug. 28, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiservices/what-are-ai-services
[34] Microsoft Learn, “What is Azure OpenAI service?” Dec. 15, 2024 .
[Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiservices/openai/overview
[35] Microsoft Learn, “Azure OpenAI Service REST API reference,” Nov.
1, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en us/azure/ai-services/openai/reference
[36] Microsoft Learn, “ Prompt engineering techniques ,” Oct. 2, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/azure/aiservices/openai/concepts/prompt-engineering
[37] T. Brown et al. , “Language models are few-shot learners,” 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
[38] Microsoft Learn, “Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) in Azure AI
Search,” Dec. 18, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/search/retrieval-augmentedgeneration-overview
[39] Microsoft Learn, “When to use Azure OpenAI fine -tuning,” Aug. 29,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/azure/aiservices/openai/concepts/fine-tuning-considerations
[40] Microsoft Learn, “Customize a model with fine-tuning,” Dec. 13, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/azure/aiservices/openai/how-to/fine-tuning
[41] Microsoft Learn, “ What is Azure AI Language?” Aug. 2 8, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiservices/language-service/overview
[42] Microsoft Learn, “Supported named entity recognition (NER) entity
categories and entity types,” Oct. 21, 2024 . [Online]. Available:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/languageservice/named-entity-recognition/concepts/named-entity-categories
[43] Microsoft Learn, “Supported personally identifiable information (PII)
entity categories,” Nov. 21, 2024 . [Online]. Available:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/languageservice/personally-identifiable-information/concepts/entity-categories
[44] Microsoft Learn, “Data, privacy, and security for Azure AI Language,”
Jul. 19, 2023 . [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/legal/cognitive-services/language-service/data-privacy
[45] Microsoft Learn, “What are Azure AI containers?” Sep. 25, 2024 .
[Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiservices/cognitive-services-container-support
[46] S. Johansson, “Suomen kielen sääntö - ja tekoälypohjainen
tekstisteganografia,” M.Sc. thesis, Tampere University, Dec. 2024.

[TABLE page=10 index=1]
Columns: [10] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers | Unnamed: 0 | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/
Row 1: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: in the biomedical realm: an assessment in the context of epilepsy,” | Unnamed: 0: [27] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: U. S. Department of Defense, “CDAO sponsors crowdsourced AI
Row 2: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: 2023 16th International Conference on Developments in eSystems | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: assurance pilot in the context of military medicine,” press release, Jan
Row 3: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Engineering (DeSE), Istanbul, Turkiye, 2023, pp. 228-233. [Online]. | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: 2, 2025. [Online]. Available:
Row 4: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Available: doi.org/10.1109/DeSE60595.2023.10469457 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/4020407/cd
Row 5: [10]: [11] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: A. Chochtoulas, “How large language models are transforming modern | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: ao-sponsors-crowdsourced-ai-assurance-pilot-in-the-context-ofRow 6: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: warfare: Is ChatGPT applicable in the military domain?” Journal of the | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: military-medici/
Row 7: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Joint Air Power Competence Centre, Journal Edition 37, 2024, pp. 68– | Unnamed: 0: [28] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: T. Han et al., “Medical large language models are susceptible to
Row 8: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: 76. [Online]. Available: https://www.japcc.org/articles/how-large- | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: targeted misinformation attacks,” npj Digit. Med. 7, 288 (2024).
Row 9: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: language-models-are-transforming-modern-warfare/ | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01282-7C
Row 10: [10]: [12] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: J.-P. Rivera et al., “Escalation risks from language models in military | Unnamed: 0: [29] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: E. Price, “OpenAI acknowledges GPT-4 is getting ‘lazy,’” PCMag UK,
Row 11: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: and diplomatic decision-making,” in FAccT, 2024, pp. 836–898. | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Dec. 9, 2023. [Online]. Available:
Row 12: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: [Online]. Available: http://dblp.uni- | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: https://uk.pcmag.com/ai/150059/openai-acknowledges-gpt-4-isRow 13: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: trier.de/db/conf/fat/facct2024.html#RiveraMRLSS24 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: getting-lazy
Row 14: [10]: [13] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: H.-M. Chuang and D.-W. Cheng, “Conversational AI over military | Unnamed: 0: [30] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
Row 15: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: scenarios using intent detection and response generation,” in Applied | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: language models,” NIPS'22: Proceedings of the 36th International
Row 16: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Sciences 12, no. 5: 2494, 2022. [Online]. Available: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, article no.
Row 17: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: https://doi.org/10.3390/app12052494 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: 1800, pp. 24824–24837. [Online]. Available:
Row 18: [10]: [14] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: V. G. Goecks and N. Waytowich, “COA-GPT: generative pre-trained | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3600270.3602070
Row 19: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: transformers for accelerated course of action development in military | Unnamed: 0: [31] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: HuggingFace, “LLM prompting guide.” [Online]. Available:
Row 20: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: operations," 2024 International Conference on Military | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/tasks/prompting#bestRow 21: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Communication and Information Systems (ICMCIS), Koblenz, | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: practices-of-llm-prompting
Row 22: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Germany, 2024, pp. 01-10, DOI: | Unnamed: 0: [32] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Z. Yin, H. Wang, K. Horio, D. Kawahara, and S. Sekine, “Should we
Row 23: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: 10.1109/ICMCIS61231.2024.10540749 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: respect LLMs? A cross-lingual study on the influence of prompt
Row 24: [10]: [15] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: E. Probasco, M. Burtell, H. Toner, and T. G. J. Rudner, “Not oracles of | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: politeness on LLM performance,” Proceedings of the Second
Row 25: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: the battlefeld: safety considerations for AI-based military decision | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Workshop on Social Influence in Conversations (SICon 2024), Nov.
Row 26: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: support systems,” Proceedings of the Seventh AAAI/ACM Conference | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: 2024. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2024.sicon-1.2/
Row 27: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES2024), 2024. [Online]. Available: | Unnamed: 0: [33] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “What are Azure AI services?” Aug. 28, 2024.
Row 28: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AIES/article/view/31712/33879 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiRow 29: [10]: [16] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: G. Yenduri et al., “GPT (generative pre-trained transformer) – a | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: services/what-are-ai-services
Row 30: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: comprehensive review on enabling technologies, potential | Unnamed: 0: [34] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “What is Azure OpenAI service?” Dec. 15, 2024.
Row 31: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: applications, emerging challenges, and future directions,” in IEEE | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiRow 32: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Access, vol. 12, pp. 54608–54649, 2024, DOI: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: services/openai/overview
Row 33: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3389497 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 34: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: [35] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “Azure OpenAI Service REST API reference,” Nov.
Row 35: [10]: [17] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: D. Boissonneault and E. Hensen, “Fake news detection with large | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: 1, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/enRow 36: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: language models on the LIAR dataset,” May 2024. [Online]. Available: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: us/azure/ai-services/openai/reference
Row 37: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-4465815/v1 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 38: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: [36] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “Prompt engineering techniques,” Oct. 2, 2024.
Row 39: [10]: [18] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: SAS-HFM-ET-FM Natural Language Processing for Defence: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiRow 40: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Exploiting the Cutting Edge of Large Language Models for Military | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: services/openai/concepts/prompt-engineering
Row 41: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Contexts, NATO Science and Technology Organization, Jan. 10, 2025. | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 42: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: [37] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: T. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” 2020.
Row 43: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: [Online]. Available: https://www.sto.nato.int/Lists/test1/ | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 44: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Row 45: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: activitydetails.aspx?ID=17550 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 46: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: [38] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) in Azure AI
Row 47: [10]: [19] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: IST-207 Military Applications for Large Language Models, activity | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 48: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Search,” Dec. 18, 2024. [Online]. Available:
Row 49: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: details, NATO Science and Technology Organization, Jan. 10, 2025. | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 50: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/search/retrieval-augmentedRow 51: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: [Online]. Available: https://www.sto.nato.int/Lists/test1/ | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 52: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: generation-overview
Row 53: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: activitydetails.aspx?ID=17424 | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 54: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: [39] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “When to use Azure OpenAI fine-tuning,” Aug. 29,
Row 55: [10]: [20] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: B. Jensen and D. Tadross, “How large-language models can | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 56: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiRow 57: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: revolutionize military planning,” War on the Rocks, Apr. 12, 2023. | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 58: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: services/openai/concepts/fine-tuning-considerations
Row 59: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: [Online]. Available: https://warontherocks.com/2023/04/how-large- | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 60: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: language-models-can-revolutionize-military-planning/ | Unnamed: 0: [40] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “Customize a model with fine-tuning,” Dec. 13, 2024.
Row 61: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiRow 62: [10]: [21] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: L. Heckmann, “Large language models have pitfalls for national | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 63: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: services/openai/how-to/fine-tuning
Row 64: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: security,” National Defense Magazine, Feb. 1, 2024. [Online]. | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/:
Row 65: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: Available: | Unnamed: 0: [41] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “What is Azure AI Language?” Aug. 28, 2024.
Row 66: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: https://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2024/1/2/large- | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aiRow 67: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: language-models-have-pitfalls-for-national-security | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: services/language-service/overview
Row 68: [10]: [22] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: B. Jensen, Y. Atalan, and I. Reynolds, “In war and society, large | Unnamed: 0: [42] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “Supported named entity recognition (NER) entity
Row 69: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: language models are what we make of them,” War on the Rocks, Sep | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: categories and entity types,” Oct. 21, 2024. [Online]. Available:
Row 70: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: 23, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://warontherocks.com/2024/09/in- | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/languageRow 71: [10]: | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: war-and-society-large-language-models-are-what-we-make-of-them/ | Unnamed: 0: | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: service/named-entity-recognition/concepts/named-entity-categories
Row 72: [10]: [23] | H. Elbatanouny et al., “Unveiling the reliability of ChatGPT answers: J. E. Robert and D. Schmidt, “10 benefits and 10 challenges of applying | Unnamed: 0: [43] | time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/: Microsoft Learn, “Supported personally identifiable information (PII)
[/TABLE]