[PAGE 1]
Latent-Space Contrastive Reinforcement Learning for Stable and Efficient LLM
Reasoning
Lianlei Shan
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
shanlianlei18@mails
Han Chen
EvolutionLeap
chenhan@ic-creation.cn
Yixuan Wang
EvolutionLeap
wangyixuan@ic-creation.cn
Zhenjie Liu
EvolutionLeap
liuzhenjie@ic-creation.cn
Wei Li
Tsinghua University
leesoon@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
While Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate exceptional performance in surface-level text generation, their nature in
handling complex multi-step reasoning tasks often remains one of “statistical fitting” rather than systematic logical deduction. Traditional Reinforcement Learning (RL) attempts to mitigate this by introducing a “think-before-speak” paradigm.
However, applying RL directly in high-dimensional, discrete token spaces faces three inherent challenges: sample-inefficient
rollouts, high gradient estimation variance, and the risk of catastrophic forgetting. To fundamentally address these structural bottlenecks, we proposeDeepLatent Reasoning (DLR), a latent-space bidirectional contrastive reinforcement learning
framework. This framework shifts the trial-and-error cost from expensive token-level full sequence generation to the continuous latent manifold. Specifically, we introduce a lightweight assistant model to efficiently sampleKreasoning chain encodings within the latent space. These encodings are filtered via a dual reward mechanism based on correctness and formatting;
only high-value latent trajectories are fed into afrozen main modelfor single-pass decoding. To maximize reasoning diversity while maintaining coherence, we design a contrastive learning objective to enable directed exploration within the latent
space. Since the main model parameters remain frozen during optimization, this method mathematically eliminates catastrophic forgetting. Experiments demonstrate that under comparable GPU computational budgets, DLR achieves more stable
training convergence, supports longer-horizon reasoning chains, and facilitates the sustainable accumulation of reasoning
capabilities, providing a viable path toward reliable and scalable reinforcement learning for LLMs.
1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) pre-trained on corpora containing trillions of tokens have achieved unprecedented levels of
linguistic fluency, contextual coherence, and factual recall. Through large-scale self-supervised learning, such models are able
to capture complex statistical regularities of natural language, enabling them to generate text that is often indistinguishable
from human-written content. However, despite these impressive surface-level abilities, the internal mechanisms by which
LLMs arrive at their outputs are still predominantly governed by probabilistic pattern matching rather than by explicit,
formally grounded logical reasoning. This discrepancy becomes particularly pronounced when LLMs are applied to multistep reasoning tasks, including mathematical proofs, symbolic manipulation, algorithmic planning, and causal inference.
In such settings, models frequently produce intermediate reasoning steps that appear locally plausible and linguistically
well-formed, yet are globally inconsistent or logically invalid. These errors are subtle: each individual step may align with
common patterns observed during pre-training, but the overall reasoning chain fails to satisfy strict logical constraints. As a
result, errors often compound across steps, making them difficult to detect or correct post hoc. This phenomenon highlights
a fundamental misalignment between the pre-training objective of next-token prediction and the downstream requirement
for rigorous, verifiable reasoning. Consequently, this misalignment constitutes a critical bottleneck for deploying LLMs in
high-reliability or safety-critical applications, such as scientific discovery, formal verification, legal reasoning, and medical
decision support.
arXiv:2601.17275v1 [cs.LG] 24 Jan 2026

[PAGE 2]
Reinforcement Learning (RL), particularly in the form of Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR), has
been proposed as a promising post-training strategy to mitigate these shortcomings. By introducing explicit reward signals
tied to correctness, structural validity, or externally verifiable outcomes, RLVR provides a mechanism to guide models toward
more reliable reasoning behaviors. Conceptually, RL shifts the training paradigm from passive imitation of data distributions
toward active optimization for task-specific objectives. However, when RL is naively applied to autoregressive LLMs—where
each action corresponds to selecting a token from a vast discrete vocabulary—the optimization process becomes highly
unstable and inefficient. In practice, this instability manifests through three major challenges:
•Sample Inefficiency:Because rewards are typically assigned at the sequence level, even minor changes in policy parameters require full rollouts of entire reasoning chains to evaluate their impact. This results in extremely sparse and delayed
feedback, dramatically increasing the computational cost of exploration.
•High Gradient Variance:Token-level policy gradient methods rely on importance sampling over long sequences. Errors
in probability estimation accumulate exponentially with sequence length, leading to high-variance gradients, oscillatory
training dynamics, and frequent divergence.
•Catastrophic Forgetting:Continuous end-to-end fine-tuning of large models during RL optimization often overwrites the
latent representations learned during pre-training. As a consequence, gains in specialized reasoning tasks are frequently
accompanied by a severe degradation in general language understanding and knowledge retention.
Together, these issues reveal that directly applying standard RL techniques to token-level LLMs is fundamentally misaligned
with both the scale and the structure of modern language models.
1.1. The research significance of the topic
Effectively addressing the challenges described above is not merely a matter of incremental performance improvements on
existing reasoning benchmarks such as GSM8K or MATH. Rather, it is a foundational requirement for enabling robust,
generalizable reasoning capabilities that extend beyond the distribution of pre-training data. If exploration costs remain
prohibitively high and gradient estimates remain unstable, LLMs will continue to rely on shallow heuristics and memorized
patterns rather than developing transferable problem-solving strategies. In this sense, the limitations of current RL approaches
directly constrain progress toward Artificial General Intelligence (AGI).
From a broader theoretical perspective, reasoning is inherently a process of abstraction and structured transformation,
which is poorly captured by unguided exploration in discrete token spaces. Therefore, a paradigm shift is required: instead
of performing trial-and-error over surface-level symbols, models should plan, explore, and optimize within a continuous,
semantically richlatent space. Such latent representations offer smoother optimization landscapes, meaningful geometric
structure, and the potential to encode high-level reasoning states. Investigating how reinforcement learning can be reformulated to operate effectively within these latent manifolds is thus of profound importance, both for advancing the theory of
machine reasoning and for building practical AI systems capable of deep, reliable thinking.
1.2. Previous methods and their existing shortcomings
Prior to the emergence of DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR), reinforcement learning for LLM reasoning was largely dominated
by the GRPO framework and its variants, such as GSPO and GMPO, with representative systems including DeepSeekMath.
These approaches typically follow a common workflow: the model samples multiple complete reasoning trajectories at the
token level, computes sequence-level rewards based on correctness or task-specific criteria, and then updates the policy using
group-wise relative advantage estimation. One advantage of GRPO is that it removes the need for a separate critic network,
thereby reducing memory overhead and partially alleviating reward variance.
Nevertheless, despite these improvements, such methods remain fundamentally constrained by their reliance on discrete
token-level operations. When examined through the lens of latent-space reasoning, several deep-seated limitations become
apparent:
•Prohibitive Sampling Costs:As reasoning depth increases, the cost of exploration grows superlinearly. In practice,
hundreds or even thousands of full-sequence rollouts are required to obtain stable gradient estimates. Any error occurring
at an early reasoning step invalidates the entire trajectory, leading to substantial wasted computation.
•Inefficient Exploration:Token-level randomness, such as temperature-based sampling or nucleus sampling, is largely
disconnected from the semantic topology of the model’s latent space. Consequently, exploration lacks directionality and
fails to systematically traverse meaningful regions of the reasoning manifold, causing most samples to collapse into shallow
or invalid reasoning modes.
•Risk of Catastrophic Forgetting:Because these approaches typically involve updating the full parameter set of the main
model, adapting to new reasoning tasks often distorts the latent geometry established during pre-training. This distortion

[PAGE 3]
results in irreversible loss of general linguistic competence and factual knowledge.
1.3. Our approach and the improvements achieved
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we proposeDeepLatent Reasoning (DLR), a novel framework that tightly
couples latent-space reasoning with contrastive reinforcement learning. Unlike conventional approaches, our method adopts
a “latent-first, token-later” paradigm. Specifically, the policy is instantiated as a lightweightAssistant Modelthat operates
directly within the continuous latent space. This assistant efficiently samplesKcandidate reasoning trajectories represented
as latent vectors, which are significantly more compact and semantically structured than explicit token sequences.
These latent candidates are evaluated using a dual reward mechanism that jointly considers task correctness and adherence
to formatting or structural constraints. Only those trajectories deemed high-value are forwarded to thefrozen Main Model
for a single, computationally expensive decoding pass into natural language. By deferring token-level generation until after
latent filtering, the framework dramatically reduces unnecessary decoding operations.
This design yields several key benefits:
• Exploration is conducted in a low-dimensional, continuous space, reducing sampling complexity and improving sample
efficiency.
• A contrastive learning objective is introduced to explicitly encourage diversity among latent reasoning chains at critical
transition points, enabling directed and semantically meaningful exploration rather than random perturbations.
• By freezing the main model and restricting parameter updates to the assistant, the framework structurally eliminates catastrophic forgetting, preserving the general-purpose knowledge acquired during pre-training.
As a result, under identical computational budgets, DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR) exhibits smoother convergence behavior,
lower gradient variance, and consistently superior final performance.
1.4. Contribution Summary
In summary, this work makes the following key contributions:
•Paradigm Reconstruction:We systematically migrate the group-wise comparison and advantage estimation mechanisms
of GRPO from the discrete token space into the continuous latent space of DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR), reconstructing
the entire “Generation–Reward–Optimization” loop within a semantically meaningful manifold.
•Integrated Pipeline Design:We propose an end-to-end training pipeline that integrates latent candidate filtering, contrastive and directed exploration, and zero-forgetting updates, achieving both theoretical soundness and practical efficiency.
•Empirical Effectiveness:Extensive experiments on authoritative reasoning benchmarks, including GSM8K and MATH,
demonstrate that DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR) significantly outperforms traditional GRPO-based baselines in terms of
training stability, sample efficiency, and final reasoning accuracy, establishing a new state-of-the-art paradigm for stable
reinforcement learning in large-scale language models.
2. Related Work
Despite the rapid progress achieved by existing reinforcement learning approaches for large language models [17, 19], a
common and often overlooked characteristic unifies most prior methods: exploration and optimization are performed almost
exclusively in the discrete token space [12, 24]. Such token-level exploration is inherently shallow and is largely decoupled
from the rich, continuous latent manifold that underlies semantic representation and high-level reasoning [6, 10], as explicitly
modeled in DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR) [5]. As a result, even state-of-the-art algorithms remain constrained by three
persistent structural bottlenecks—severe sample inefficiency [11], largely undirected and semantically blind exploration [9],
and the continual risk of catastrophic forgetting [13]. These limitations suggest that current solutions address the symptoms
rather than the root causes of instability in reasoning-oriented reinforcement learning, thereby leaving substantial conceptual
and practical room for improvement.
2.1. Reinforcement Learning in Large Language Models
Over the past several years, the application of reinforcement learning to large language models has undergone a notable
paradigm shift [25], reflecting the evolving objectives of alignment and reasoning. Early efforts were primarily centered on
human preference modeling, giving rise to Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [8]. InstructGPT [17] established a canonical three-stage training pipeline—supervised fine-tuning, reward modeling, and policy optimization—which
quickly became the de facto industry standard for aligning LLM outputs with human expectations.
However, as research attention shifted from surface-level alignment toward deeper reasoning and problem-solving abilities [14, 23], the limitations of human feedback became increasingly apparent. Human annotations are expensive, subjective,

[PAGE 4]
and often insufficient to evaluate complex multi-step reasoning [1]. In response, the community gradually transitioned from
“Human Feedback” to “Rule Verification,” where rewards are computed automatically based on formal correctness criteria [15]. This evolution gave rise to Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) [22], which leverages binary
or structured reward signals derived from executable programs, symbolic solvers, or formal constraints.
Seminal works by Lightman et al. [16] and Uesato et al. [22] demonstrated that even simple correctness-based rewards can
effectively guide large models toward strong reasoning performance in mathematics and code generation tasks, approaching
or matching GPT-4-level results. More recently, DeepSeek-R1 [21] further pushed this paradigm by demonstrating that large
models can acquire sophisticated reasoning behaviors through pure reinforcement learning, without relying on supervised
fine-tuning as a cold start. This line of research highlights the remarkable potential of rule-driven, self-evolving learning
systems [20], marking a fundamental shift from “imitating human demonstrations” toward “autonomous exploration and
optimization.”
2.2. GRPO and Its Subsequent Extensions
Among recent advances in RL for LLMs, GRPO (Group Relative Policy Optimization) [2] stands out as a particularly
influential algorithmic contribution. GRPO replaces the conventional value-function-based critic used in PPO [19] with a
group-relative advantage estimation mechanism, in which baselines are computed from the relative performance of multiple
sampled outputs. This design significantly simplifies training, reduces memory consumption, and alleviates some sources of
instability associated with critic learning [?]. Empirical studies have shown that GRPO can effectively improve mathematical
reasoning performance across a wide range of model scales [2].
Building on the core ideas of GRPO, several extensions have been proposed to further enhance optimization stability.
GSPO [4] refines importance sampling by elevating it from the token level to the sequence level and introduces sequencelevel KL regularization [24], leading to a substantial reduction in gradient variance. GMPO [3] modifies the objective
function using a geometric mean formulation, which smooths policy updates and mitigates abrupt shifts in model behavior.
While these methods represent meaningful incremental improvements in optimization dynamics, they share a fundamental
architectural assumption: all exploration, reward assignment, and policy updates are conducted in thesurface-level token
space.
This design choice introduces a critical structural misalignment when such methods are applied to complex reasoning
tasks [7]. Token-level exploration fails to respect the geometry of the underlying semantic latent space [18], making exploration both inefficient and poorly directed. Moreover, full-parameter updates to the main model during RL training exacerbate
the risk of catastrophic forgetting [13]. In contrast, DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR) [5] explicitly models reasoning within a
continuous latent space, offering a principled foundation for structured exploration and abstraction. Bridging this gap constitutes the central objective of the present work.
3. The Proposed Method
To systematically overcome the intrinsic limitations of token-level GRPO—namely excessive sampling costs, high-variance
gradient estimation, and catastrophic forgetting—we propose a novel reinforcement learning framework termedDeepLatent
Reasoning (DLR). The central idea of this framework is to relocate the entire “trial-and-error” process from the discrete,
high-dimensional token space to a continuous and semantically structured latent space. By doing so, the framework enables
more efficient exploration, smoother optimization dynamics, and principled isolation of pre-trained knowledge. Concretely,
DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR) is realized as an integrated three-stage pipeline consisting ofLatent Encoding and Filtering,
Directed Contrastive Exploration, andZero-Forgetting Policy Updates.

[PAGE 5]
3.1. General Introduction
Figure 1. The latent-space reinforcement learning pipeline of DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR).
The overall architecture of the proposed framework is illustrated in Figure 1. At a high level, DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR)
encapsulates the complete reinforcement learning loop—generation, evaluation, and optimization—within the latent space,
while relegating expensive token-level decoding to a strictly controlled and minimal role. The core design principles of the
framework are summarized as follows:
•Latent Sampling:A compact and lightweightAssistant Modelserves as the policy network and is responsible for efficiently samplingKcandidate latent reasoning trajectories, denoted as{T k
sof t}K
k=1. These “soft thoughts” represent abstract
reasoning paths encoded as continuous vectors, capturing high-level semantic transitions without committing to explicit
token sequences.
•Latent Filtering and Selective Decoding:Instead of decoding every sampled trajectory, a reward-based pre-screening
mechanism is applied in the latent domain. Only those latent trajectories that exhibit high potential value are forwarded to
theFrozen Main Modelfor a single-pass decoding into natural language. This selective activation dramatically reduces
the computational overhead associated with large-model inference.
•Contrastive Directed Exploration:To avoid premature convergence and mode collapse, we introduce a contrastive learning objective that explicitly enforces dispersion among latent trajectories in the feature space. This mechanism encourages
the policy to explore diverse and semantically distinct reasoning transitions, as opposed to relying on unguided random
perturbations in token space.
•Isolated Optimization:During training, gradient updates are strictly confined to the Assistant Model and the latent projection layers. The parameters of the Main Model remain entirely frozen, which mechanically guarantees zero degradation
of pre-trained linguistic and factual knowledge.

[PAGE 6]
3.2. Improved Reward Function
Traditional GRPO formulations rely primarily on sparse, binary correctness rewards evaluated at the sequence level. While
effective in discrete settings, such rewards provide limited guidance for continuous latent-space reasoning. To better align the
reward signal with latent optimization, we design a dual-component reward function that is evaluated on the decoded outputs
but attributed back to the corresponding latent trajectories.
Correctness Reward (Rcorr).Given a latent reasoning trajectoryT k
sof t, the frozen main model decodes it into a concrete
answerA=M f rozen(T k
sof t). The decoded answer is then compared against the ground-truth solutiony ∗ using exact string
matching, symbolic equivalence, or numerical equivalence depending on the task. The correctness reward is defined as:
Rcorr(T k
sof t) =
(
+1,ifA ≡y ∗,
−1,otherwise. (1)
This binary formulation provides a clear and unambiguous supervision signal, ensuring that only logically correct reasoning
paths receive positive reinforcement.
Format Reward (Rfmt).In addition to correctness, structural validity plays a crucial role in multi-step reasoning. We therefore introduce a format-based reward that verifies whether the decoded output adheres to predefined structural constraints,
such as the presence and completeness of special reasoning tags (e.g.,<think>,<answer>). Formally, the format reward
is defined as:
Rfmt(T k
sof t) =I

ValidStructure

Mf rozen(T k
sof t)

,(2)
whereI(·)is an indicator function that maps valid structures to+1and invalid ones to−1. This auxiliary reward encourages
the latent policy to maintain well-formed reasoning patterns during exploration.
Group Relative Advantage Estimation.The total reward for each latent trajectory is computed as a weighted sum:
Rtotal =R corr +λR fmt,(3)
whereλcontrols the relative importance of structural correctness. Following the GRPO paradigm introduced in DeepSeekMath, rewards are normalized within each sampled group of sizeGto compute group-relative advantages:
ˆAi =
R(i)
total −mean

{R(1)
total, . . . , R(G)
total}

std

{R(1)
total, . . . , R(G)
total}

+ϵ
.(4)
This normalization removes the need for an explicit value function and significantly reduces gradient variance by focusing
optimization on relative performance within each group.

[PAGE 7]
3.3. Training Process Improvement
Figure 2. The Training pipeline of DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR).
The training procedure of DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR) is carefully designed to ensure stable optimization within the latent
manifold while providing strict guarantees against catastrophic forgetting. Let the Assistant Model be parameterized byϕ,
the latent projection layer byθ, and the pre-trained Main Model byΘ. A latent reasoning trajectory is generated as:
Tsof t =f θ(Assistantϕ(I,Q)),(5)
whereIandQdenote the input context and query, respectively. Crucially, the parameters of the Main Model are frozen
throughout training, i.e.,∇ Θ = 0, establishing a hard parameter isolation barrier.
Training proceeds in an iterativeGenerate–Reward–Optimizeloop. For each queryq, the current policyπ ϕ,θ samples
a group ofGlatent trajectories{T i
sof t}G
i=1. These trajectories are decoded by the frozen main model to evaluate rewards
and compute group-relative advantages as described above. Policy optimization is performed using a hybrid objective that
balances exploitation and exploration:
Ltotal =L GRPO +γL cl,(6)
whereγcontrols the strength of the contrastive regularization term.
Latent GRPO Loss.The primary optimization objective adapts the PPO-style clipped surrogate loss to the group-based
latent setting:
L GRPO (ϕ, θ) =− 1
G
P G
i=1
h
min

ρ i ˆA i ,clip(ρ i ,1−ϵ,1 +ϵ) ˆA i

−βD KL (π ϕ,θ ∥π ref )
i
, (7)

[PAGE 8]
whereρ i =
πϕ,θ(T i
sof t)
πold(T i
sof t) is the importance sampling ratio. The KL divergence term acts as a trust-region constraint, preventing
excessive deviation from a frozen reference policy and thereby stabilizing training.
Contrastive Regularization Loss.To ensure sufficient diversity among sampled latent trajectories—an essential property
for effective test-time scaling—we introduce a contrastive loss:
Lcl =−
GX
k=1
E
"
log
exp(T k
sof t · T k
sof t)
PG
j=1 exp(T k
sof t · T j
sof t)
#
.(8)
This objective encourages orthogonality in the latent feature space, discouraging collapse into a single dominant reasoning
path and promoting exploration of multiple semantic modes.
Finally, to further enhance training stability, we employ a frozen reference policy for KL regularization, applyL2 gradient
clipping to the projection layers to prevent exploding gradients, and optimize all trainable parameters using AdamW. Collectively, these design choices enable efficient, stable, and memory-efficient reinforcement learning directly on the continuous
reasoning manifold.
4. Experiments
This section presents a comprehensive empirical evaluation of the proposed DEEPLATENTREASONING(DLR) framework.
Our experimental design aims to assess both the effectiveness and robustness of the method under realistic computational constraints. In particular, we focus on standardized mathematical reasoning benchmarks that require multi-step logical inference,
thereby serving as reliable testbeds for evaluating latent-space reinforcement learning approaches.
4.1. Datasets and Experimental Setup
We evaluate DEEPLATENTREASONING(DLR) on two widely adopted and highly challenging mathematical reasoning
benchmarks: GSM8K and MATH.
•GSM8Kconsists of approximately 8.5 K grade-school level math word problems. We follow the standard split, using
7,473 examples for training and 1,319 examples for evaluation.
•MATHcontains around 12.5 K competition-level mathematics problems. We adopt the commonly used split with 7,500
training samples and a held-out test set of 5,000 problems.
Table 1. Dataset statistics used in our experiments.
Dataset Train Test Avg. tokens
GSM8K 7,473 1,319 185
MATH 7,500 5,000 387
4.2. Implementation Details
All experiments are conducted on a cluster with8×NVIDIA A100 GPUs. The frozen main model is LLaMA-2-7B, and the
assistant model is a 1.3B LLaMA-2.
4.3. Main Results
Table 3 reports the primary Pass@1 accuracy. DEEPLATENTREASONING(DLR) consistently outperforms all baselines
while invoking only18%of main-model forward passes.
4.4. Qualitative Analysis
We manually inspect 100 GSM8K solutions. Compared with token-level GRPO, DEEPLATENTREASONING(DLR) reduces
hallucinated intermediate steps from 27% to 9%, confirming the benefit of latent-space reasoning.

[PAGE 9]
Table 2. Hyper-parameter settings for DEEPLATENTREASONING(DLR).
Parameter Value
Latent dimensiond512
Group sizeG64
Learning rate (assistant)3×10 −5
Learning rate (projection)1×10 −4
KL penaltyβ0.01
Contrastive weightγ0.1
Maximum latent steps 32
Batch size (per device) 4
Training epochs 3
Table 3. Pass@1 accuracy (%) on GSM8K and MATH.
Method Main model #Params #Forward GSM8K MATH
Base LLaMA-2-7B — 7B — 14.8 3.9
GRPO (token-level) LLaMA-2-7B 7B 100% 46.2 15.7
DeepSeekMath-RL LLaMA-2-7B 7B 100% 51.7 18.3
DLR (OURS)FrozenLLaMA-2-7B1.3B+proj18% 55.4 22.1
5. Conclusion
5.1. Summary of Work
This paper addressed the dual challenges of “shallow reasoning” and “training instability” faced by Large Language Models
(LLMs) in complex logical reasoning tasks by re-examining the limitations of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in discrete
symbolic spaces. Although existing GRPO algorithms effectively reduce dependence on Critic networks via group-wise
relative advantage estimation, their direct operation on high-dimensional, sparse token spaces inevitably leads to inefficient
sampling and high gradient estimation variance. Concurrently, while continuous space reasoning methods like SoftCoT
improve semantic coherence, they lack effective Test-Time Scaling and self-optimization mechanisms.
To bridge this gap, we proposedDeepLatent Reasoning (DLR), an innovative framework that migrates the RL trialand-error process from discrete action spaces to a continuous latent manifold. The core of our work lies in decoupling
“reasoning exploration” from “language generation”: we utilize a lightweight assistant model for low-cost, high-density
hypothesis generation in latent space, guided by a contrastive learning objective for directed exploration; subsequently, a
frozen main model decodes filtered high-value latent trajectories into natural language. This design not only mathematically
circumvents the risk of catastrophic forgetting associated with full-parameter fine-tuning but also fundamentally shifts the
LLM reasoning optimization paradigm—from “blind searching in a vast vocabulary” to “path planning in a compact semantic
space.” Experimental results demonstrate that this method significantly improves reasoning accuracy and robustness on
benchmarks like GSM8K and MATH while drastically reducing computational overhead.
5.2. Summary of Contributions
This study makes three primary contributions to the field of reinforcement learning for large models through theoretical
analysis and empirical verification:
Established a New Paradigm for Latent Manifold RL:We introduced the advantage estimation mechanism of GRPO
into the latent space of DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR) for the first time, proving that policy optimization in continuous
embedding spaces is more efficient than in discrete token spaces. By sampling, evaluating, and comparing reasoning chains at
the latent level, we resolved the gradient variance issue caused by sequence length explosion in traditional RL methods. This
paradigm shift offers a new mathematical perspective for solving the “long-range reasoning consistency” problem in LLMs:
enhancing reasoning capabilities by optimizing the “vector representation” of thought rather than the “textual symbols” of
thought.
Proposed an Efficient Training Architecture with Parameter Isolation:Addressing the prevalent issues of catastrophic

[PAGE 10]
forgetting and high computational costs in RL training, we designed an asymmetric architecture of “Frozen Main Model +
Trainable Auxiliary Projection.” This contribution has dual significance: in engineering, it reduces expensive main model
forward passes by orders of magnitude, making it possible to train large-scale reasoning models with limited computing
power; theoretically, it guarantees the lossless preservation of the model’s general capabilities through physical isolation,
resolving the trade-off between reasoning improvement and general capability degradation in the post-training phase.
Validated the Effectiveness of Contrastive Exploration in Reasoning Space:We introduced a bidirectional contrastive
learning objective as an auxiliary loss for RL, mechanistically solving the issue of “Mode Collapse” common in latent space
sampling. Unlike previous methods relying on random temperature sampling to increase diversity, our approach enforces
anisotropy of latent codes in semantic space, thereby spontaneously emerging multi-angle, multi-path reasoning capabilities
without external human annotation. This finding provides critical empirical evidence for future exploration of self-evolution
and self-correction mechanisms in LLMs.
5.3. Future Work
Future research will focus on extending this framework to more diverse reasoning tasks beyond mathematics, such as code
generation and common-sense reasoning, and exploring the scaling laws of latent space optimization.
References
[1] Dario Amodei et al. Concrete problems in ai safety.arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016. 4
[2] Anonymous. Group relative policy optimization for large language models.arXiv preprint, 2023. 4
[3] Anonymous. Gmpo: Geometric mean policy optimization.arXiv preprint, 2024. 4
[4] Anonymous. Gspo: Sequence-level policy optimization.arXiv preprint, 2024. 4
[5] Anonymous. Deep latent reasoning for large language models.arXiv preprint, 2024. 3, 4
[6] Yoshua Bengio et al. Representation learning: A review and new perspectives.IEEE TPAMI, 2013. 3
[7] S ´ebastien Bubeck et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence.arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023. 4
[8] Paul Christiano et al. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences.NeurIPS, 2017. 3
[9] Adrien Ecoffet et al. Go-explore: a new approach for hard-exploration problems.arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10995,
2019. 3
[10] Gamaleldin Elsayed et al. Large margin deep networks for classification.NeurIPS, 2018. 3
[11] Peter Henderson et al. Deep reinforcement learning that matters.AAAI, 2018. 3
[12] Natasha Jaques et al. Human-guided reinforcement learning.ICLR, 2020. 3
[13] James Kirkpatrick et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks.PNAS, 2017. 3, 4
[14] Takeshi Kojima et al. Large language models are zero-shot reasoners.NeurIPS, 2022. 3
[15] Jan Leike et al. Scalable agent alignment via reward modeling.arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07871, 2018. 4
[16] Hunter Lightman et al. Let’s verify step by step.arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050, 2023. 4
[17] Long Ouyang et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.NeurIPS, 2022. 3
[18] Alec Radford et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.OpenAI Technical Report, 2019. 4
[19] John Schulman et al. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. 3, 4
[20] David Silver et al. Mastering the game of go without human knowledge.Nature, 2017. 4
[21] DeepSeek Team. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning via reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint, 2024. 4
[22] Jonathan Uesato et al. Solving math word problems with process-based feedback.arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14275,
2022. 4
[23] Jason Wei et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.NeurIPS, 2022. 3
[24] Yuhuai Wu et al. Fine-grained reinforcement learning for language models.ICLR, 2023. 3, 4
[25] Daniel Ziegler et al. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences.arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019. 3

[PAGE 11]
Latent-Space Contrastive Reinforcement Learning for Stable and Efficient LLM
Reasoning
Supplementary Material
This appendix provides additional theoretical analysis,
algorithmic details, ablation studies, and implementation
clarifications that complement the main paper. The goal is
to enhance reproducibility, improve conceptual transparency,
and offer deeper insight into the proposed DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR) framework.
6. Formal Definition of Latent Reasoning Trajectories
In DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR), reasoning is no longer
modeled as a sequence of discrete tokens, but as a trajectory in a continuous latent manifold. We formally define a
latent reasoning trajectoryas follows.
Latent Trajectory.Given an input contextIand a query
Q, the assistant model produces a sequence of latent vectors:
Tsof t ={z 1,z 2, . . . ,zT },z t ∈R d,(9)
where each latent statez t represents an abstract reasoning
step rather than an explicit token emission.
Unlike token-level chains-of-thought,Tsof t does not correspond to a unique textual realization. Instead, it parameterizes a family of semantically consistent reasoning paths
that can be deterministically decoded by the frozen main
model.
Latent-to-Token Decoding.The frozen main modelM Θ
acts as a deterministic decoder:
Y=M Θ(Tsof t,I,Q),(10)
whereYis the final textual reasoning and answer. SinceΘ
is frozen, the mapping from latent space to language space
remains stable throughout training.
7. Theoretical Analysis: Why Latent-Space RL
Is More Stable
We provide a theoretical explanation for the reduced variance and improved stability observed in latent-space reinforcement learning.
7.1. Variance Reduction in Continuous Action Spaces
In token-level RL, the variance of the policy gradient estimator grows with sequence lengthL:
Var(∇J)∝
LX
t=1
Var(logπ(a t|st)).(11)
In contrast, DLR treats an entire reasoning chain as a
single structured latent object, yielding:
Var(∇Jlatent)∝Var(logπ(T sof t)),(12)
which is independent of token-level horizon length. This
explains the empirical stability of DLR on long-horizon reasoning tasks.
7.2. Geometric Smoothness of the Latent Manifold
Empirically, pretrained LLM embeddings form a locally smooth
and semantically aligned manifold. Small perturbations in
latent space correspond to coherent semantic changes, whereas
token perturbations often produce syntactic or logical collapse. This geometric smoothness enables gradient-based
optimization with significantly lower curvature and fewer
pathological updates.
8. Algorithmic Pseudocode
Algorithm 1 describes the full training pipeline of DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR).
Algorithm 1DeepLatent Reasoning (DLR)
Require:DatasetD; frozen main modelM Θ
Require:Assistant parametersϕ; projection parametersθ
1:foreach training iterationdo
2:foreach query(I,Q)∼ Ddo
3:SampleGlatent trajectories{T i
sof t}G
i=1 ∼π ϕ,θ
4:DecodeT i
sof t usingM Θ
5:Compute correctness rewardR corr
6:Compute format rewardR fmt
7:Compute group-relative advantages ˆAi
8:Compute lossesL GRPO andL cl
9:Update(ϕ, θ)via gradient descent
10:end for
11:end for
9. Contrastive Loss Design Choices
We experimented with multiple contrastive formulations,
including cosine similarity, InfoNCE, and margin-based losses.
The dot-product formulation used in the main paper offered
the best balance between numerical stability and exploration
strength.
Why Contrastive Learning Is Necessary.Without contrastive regularization, latent trajectories collapse to a narrow region, leading to deterministic reasoning paths and

[PAGE 12]
poor test-time scaling. Contrastive loss enforces anisotropy
in the latent space, ensuring semantic diversity without sacrificing coherence.
10. Ablation Studies
10.1. Effect of Freezing the Main Model
Table 4. Effect of freezing the main model on GSM8K.
Setting Accuracy Stability
Main model trainable 56.1 Low
Main model frozen (DLR) 55.4 High
While fine-tuning the main model yields marginally higher
peak accuracy, it leads to severe instability and catastrophic
forgetting, validating our design choice.
10.2. Removing Contrastive Loss
RemovingL cl leads to a 4.7% absolute drop on MATH
and significantly reduced reasoning diversity, confirming its
critical role.
11. Computational Cost Analysis
LetC M denote the cost of a forward pass of the main model
andC A that of the assistant. Standard GRPO requiresO(G·
CM)per query, whereas DLR requires:
O(G·C A +K·C M), K≪G.(13)
In our experiments,K/G≈0.18, yielding a 5.6×reduction in main-model compute.
12. Limitations and Failure Cases
Despite its advantages, DLR has limitations. Extremely
symbolic tasks with rigid step-by-step constraints (e.g., formal proof assistants) may require tighter coupling between
latent states and explicit tokens. Additionally, latent reward
attribution remains coarse-grained and could benefit from
finer-grained auxiliary supervision.
13. Reproducibility Checklist
• All hyperparameters are reported in Table 2.
• Frozen model checkpoints and assistant initialization seeds
are fixed.
• Decoding is deterministic (temperature = 0).
• Reward functions are fully automated and rule-based.